The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Palace of Glass and the Gathering of the
People, by John Stoughton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Palace of Glass and the Gathering of the People
       A Book for the Exhibition


Author: John Stoughton



Release Date: February 8, 2021  [eBook #64495]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PALACE OF GLASS AND THE
GATHERING OF THE PEOPLE***


Transcribed from the 1851 Religious Tract Society edition by David Price.
Many thanks to the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, Local
Studies, for allowing their copy to be used for this transcription.





                                   THE
                             PALACE OF GLASS
                                 AND THE
                         GATHERING OF THE PEOPLE.


                        A BOOK FOR THE EXHIBITION.

                                * * * * *

                                  BY THE
                           REV. JOHN STOUGHTON.

             Humani generis progressus,
       Ex communi omnium labore ortus,
    Uniuscujusque industriæ debet esse finis:
                   Hoc adjuvando,
    Dei optimi maximi voluntatem exsequimur.

             The progress of the human race,
    Resulting from the common labour of all men,
    Ought to be the final object of the exertion of each individual.
                In promoting this end,
    We are carrying out the will of the great and blessed God.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                       THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY,
           DEPOSITORY, 56, PATERNOSTER-ROW, AND 65, ST. PAUL’S
                               CHURCHYARD.

                                * * * * *

                                  1851.




ADVERTISEMENT.


THE Writer of the following pages has, from the first announcement of the
project, taken a sunny view of the nature and tendency of the Great
Exhibition.  Originating in the disinterested suggestions of the
Illustrious Prince Consort—designed and adapted to promote the interests
of art and commerce, and the fellowship of nations—supported by persons,
who, in addition to the distinctions of rank or wealth, are remarkable
for knowledge, benevolence, and piety—promoted generally from a desire to
advance the welfare of our country and mankind—responded to very
extensively abroad as well as at home with manifest cordiality and good
will—and calling forth and securing the prayers of Christians in
reference to the undertaking—it appeared to the Author to warrant
cheering and hopeful anticipations.  The wonderful scene on the day of
opening—as must have been felt by those who have read the graphic
descriptions of it in the public prints, and especially by those who were
privileged to behold that unprecedented spectacle—was of a character to
strengthen favourable expectations of the result of the enterprise.  The
order, harmony, and mutual kindness manifested by the vast multitude on
that occasion—the moral impression which it certainly made on many—and
the religious element introduced into the august ceremonial, evidently
awakening sympathy in thousands of hearts which then beat with strange
emotion—surely may be regarded as tokens for good!

The Author is far from intending to assume a tone of confident
prediction—remembering that only the Infinite and All-wise One can
embrace the entire bearings and tendencies of human events—but he may be
allowed to confess, that while he does not overlook the incidental evils
to which such a vast gathering of the people may give rise, his hopes
decidedly predominate over his fears.  The following pages, expressive of
thoughts and feelings which are pervaded by the spirit thus indicated,
are now commended to the candid attention of the reader, with an earnest
prayer for the Divine blessing on their perusal.




CONTENTS.

                      PART I.
                                                PAGE
THE POET’S DREAM                                   1
                      PART II.
CONTRASTS BETWEEN THE PAST AND PRESENT            29
                     PART III.
VOICES OF HOPE AND WARNING                        51
                      PART IV.
ASSOCIATIONS, SECULAR AND SACRED                  79
                      PART V.
BENEFICIAL RESULTS, PROBABLE AND POSSIBLE        115
                      PART VI.
LESSONS, PERTINENT AND PRACTICAL                 145




PART I.
THE POET’S DREAM.


    “The bard beholds the work achieved,
       And, as he sees the shadow rise
       Sublime before his wondering eyes,
    Starts at the image his own mini conceived.”

                                                              KIRKE WHITE.

FIVE centuries ago there might have been seen in the streets of old
London, one of those gifted mortals who are now and then sent into the
world by the Father of spirits, to stamp their name upon the age in which
they live, and to enshrine its memory amidst the splendours of their own
genius.  With a deep and luminous insight into the scenes of nature, the
works of art and the ways of men, did there look forth from those large
bright eyes of his a poetic soul of an order high and rare.  As he passed
along the highways of his native city, to which he tells us he had “more
kindly love, and fuller appetite than to any other place on earth,” he
was gathering materials for a living picture of his times; or rather
forming a photograph representation of men around, catching in the magic
mirror of his verse the evanescent forms and colours, lights and shades,
of our Proteus-like humanity, and there retaining them in stedfast
imagery for ever.

Chaucer, though unhappily as a writer not free from moral blemishes, was,
like Hogarth, the great historic painter of his age, sketching not armies
in battle, or parliaments in conclave, but a people in their costume and
intercourse, their business and pastime, their private habits and daily
life.  In turning over the black-letter volume of his works, we see and
hear our ancestors, and talk with them.  It is as if the very glance of
the eye, the quivering of the lip, and the tones of the voice, had by
some strange process been preserved by this wonder-working artist.

But Chaucer often passed beyond the sphere of contemporary realities.
The lore of chivalry he was accustomed to weave into a rich tapestry of
verse; and ideal realms, and groups of visionary beings, he was wont to
sketch with the power and beauty of a Fuseli.  It was in one of the
playful flights of his untiring fancy, that he touched on scenes and
objects strangely associated with the occasion of this little book;—it
occurs in a poem, well known as “Chaucer’s Dream.”  Throughout the wild
revellings of his genius, which he has recorded in that production, it
would be beside our present purpose to follow him.  The general plot and
machinery of the tale are in the extravagantly symbolic spirit of the
age,—utterly unlike what could happen at any period, and not at all
entering within the range of our conceptions now.  In the nineteenth
century a poet’s strangest vision would not be like his.  But amidst
associations out of all congruity with modern times did the bard we have
described fashion out a picture, almost the counterpart of what we have
lived to witness embodied in the actual work of men.  He “had a dream
which was not all a dream.”  He imagined, standing on an island, a
structure, whose wall and gate were “all of glass:”

    “And so was closed round about,
    That leaveless none came in or out—
    And of a suit were all the towers,
    Subtilly carven, after flowers
    Of uncouth colours, during aye—
    That never been, or seen, in May.”

This island of the Crystal Palace he represents under the sovereignty of
a beautiful lady, who becomes wedded to a royal knight, and he describes
a festival celebrated in tents on a large plain, by

    “The Prince, the Queen, and all the rest,”

amidst a wood between “a river and a well,” continuing for three months,—

    “From early rising of the sun
    Until the day was spent and done.”

The coincidence between these parts of the poet’s dream and the reality
of 1851, with respect to the place, the Palace, the regal personages, and
the period of the year, is singular enough: it is one of those remarkable
exploits of thought, which appear sometimes in the form of reproductions
of the past, and sometimes in the form of anticipations of the
future,—exhibiting the counterpart of far distant things, now on the page
of history, then in poetic strains, and again in the records of
science—likenesses between what has been and what is, apparently without
any connexion whatever: likenesses which baffle the effort to explain the
law of their occurrence, and which seem to indicate the existence of
unfathomable sympathies between minds in ages present and remote, and
suggest to us yet once more the oft-told truth that there are more things
in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in our philosophy.  What was the
precise form and fashion of the structure Chaucer pictured in his charmed
isle we cannot tell; but we question whether, even in his boldest dreams,
he ever saw aught so marvellous as that which the people of all lands are
flocking, or will flock, to see in our Hyde Park the present summer.
Chaucer was not ignorant of the ways of building in the age in which he
lived, for he was appointed clerk of the works at Windsor Castle, in the
year 1390; but assuredly, among all the plans which were ever suggested
by his genius, or adopted by his judgment, as capable of being reduced to
realities, such a thing as the grand transparent Hall of Industry never
entered his mind.

It may indeed be said, that every beautiful work of art was once a
dream,—it floated in the imagination before it was fixed and made visible
by the hand.  A picture by Corregio or Rubens is a painter’s dream
transferred to canvass.  The Apollo Belvidere is a sculptor’s dream
carved in marble.  Milton’s “Paradise Lost” is a poet’s dream committed
to paper.  Strasburg Cathedral is an architect’s dream built up in stone.
Thousands of strange images arise in artistic minds which of necessity
never find expression in any actual work; some, also, worthy of being set
in ripe and lasting fruit, perish in the blossom: but all the great
productions of ancient and modern times assuredly constitute a harvest,
of which the seeds were only dreams.  To whatever order of genius the
origin of the Crystal Palace belongs, it certainly embodies a beautiful
dream, which in a happy hour lighted on the fancy of Mr. Paxton.  It was
shaping itself into form during the few days he thus describes:

    “It was not until one morning when I was present with my friend Mr.
    Ellis, at an early sitting in the House of Commons, that the idea of
    sending in a design occurred to me.  A conversation took place
    between us, with reference to the construction of the New House of
    Commons, in the course of which I observed that I was afraid they
    would also commit a blunder in the building for the Industrial
    Exhibition.  I told him that I had a notion in my head, and that if
    he would accompany me to the Board of Trade, I would ascertain
    whether it was too late to send in a design.  Well, this was on
    Friday, the 11th of June.  From London I went to the Menai Straits,
    to see the third tube of the Britannia Bridge placed, and on my
    return to Derby, I had to attend some business at the Board-room,
    during which time, however, my whole mind was devoted to this
    project; and, whilst the business proceeded, I sketched the outline
    of my design on a large sheet of blotting-paper.  Having sketched
    this design on blotting-paper, I sat up all night until I had worked
    it out to my own satisfaction.”

Thus was created in the inventor’s mind an image of his work, with a
rapidity precursive of the speed with which the work itself has since
been realized.  The dream grew up and bore its ripened fruits in a few
hours: the Industrial Palace, in a few months, has attained its full
perfection; so that, as if by miracle, it now looks like the old
fig-tree,—

    “Such as at this day to Indians known—
    In Malabar or Deccan, spreads her arms,
    Branching so broad and long, that on the ground
    The bending twigs take root, and daughters grow
    About the mother tree; a pillar’d shade,
    High overarch’d, and echoing walks between.”

We do not know whether Mr. Paxton possesses what is generally understood
by a poetic mind; but, certainly, no one who has gazed on the stupendous
structure erected in Hyde Park, according to his plan, but must feel that
a poetical idea there stands expressed.  So gigantic in its dimensions,
simple in its form, and graceful in its details, it awakens a sense of
vague wonder, which, on a careful survey of the object exciting it,
subsides into calm, intelligent admiration.  It inspires a curiosity to
examine into the parts and proportions of so strange an edifice—into the
minute and delicate filling up of so bold an outline; and commends itself
to the taste and judgment of the spectator, as it spreads out before his
eye, like the pages of a volume, and reveals, on close inspection—

    —“The subtle shining secrecies
    Writ in the glassy margin of such books.”

Seen a little while ago, as the morning vapours rolled round its
base,—its far stretching roofs, rising one above another, and its great
transept, majestically arched, soaring out of the envelope of clouds, its
pillars, window-bars, and pinnacles enamelled with rich hoar-frost, the
trees around it all sparkling with the same bright ornament,—the
structure looked literally a castle in the air, like some palace, such as
one reads of in idle tales of Arabian enchantment, having about it all
the ethereal softness of a dream,—being itself “the fabric of a vision,”
rather than a structure of solid and enduring material.  Looked at from a
distance at noon, when the sunbeams come pouring upon the terraced and
vaulted top, it resembles a regal palace of silver, built for some
eastern prince; when the sun at eventide sheds on its sides his parting
rays, the edifice is transformed into a temple of gold and rubies; and in
the calm hours of night, when “the moon walketh in her brightness,” the
immense surface of glass which the building presents, looks like a sea or
lake throwing back in flickering smiles the radiant glances of the queen
of heaven.  Ever does it repose in its strong, though not stone-built,
foundations—the very image of beauty and strength.

The antecedent of this great work—the parent construction, of which it is
the offspring, nobler than its sire—had more than a dash of poetry about
it.  The building we refer to is the glass conservatory at Chatsworth,
contrived for the preservation of the gigantic water-lily, found on
new-year’s day, 1837, on the river Berbice, in Demerara, and sent to
England by sir Robert Schomburgh.  The arrival of the extraordinary
plant, with its six-foot leaf, shaped like an elegant salver, and adorned
with broad rims of green and crimson, was warmly welcomed by that patron
of botanical science, the duke of Devonshire, and forthwith committed to
the charge of Mr. Paxton, then and still the scientific and tasteful
horticulturist-in-chief at the far-famed paradise of the Peak.  Improving
upon all his former improvements in the arrangement of glass-houses, he
contrived a fitting receptacle for this new specimen of the western
flora, surnamed the “_Victoria Regia_,”—and “so well had everything been
prepared for its reception, that it flourished as vigorously as if it had
been restored to its native soil and climate.  Its growth and development
were astonishingly rapid, for on the 9th of November a flower was
produced a yard in circumference.  In little more than a month after the
first seeds ripened, some of them were tilled; and on the 16th of
February succeeding, young plants made their appearance.  The
extraordinary lily obeyed nature’s law of development with such
unexpected rapidity, that it outgrew the dimensions of its home in little
more than a month.”  This circumstance gave rise to a new conservatory of
much greater extent, out of which has grown the idea of the present, and
much vaster one, for receiving the world’s industry—one which throws its
predecessor into the shade, and which, in addition to its other wonders,
included within its vitreous walls some fine old trees, above a hundred
feet in height.

To return again to Chaucer; we cannot help thinking how much there is in
this glass palace, and in what is connected with it, which would have
seemed even to his credulous fancy, more strange and startling than any
dream.  Whence all the glass could come, needful for a building composed
chiefly of such material, and of length more than quadruple that of St.
Peter’s Abbey at Westminster, would have sorely puzzled our architect and
poet to divine, in days when glass windows were so little used, that his
great contemporary, William of Wykeham, who built Windsor Castle, was
hard put to it to find twelve glaziers to do the work there, and actually
had to _press_ men into the service from different counties!  The unity
of principle, too, pervading the whole construction—everything in the
great building being a dividend or multiple of twenty-four {14}—so
different from the bold, yet not inharmonious, irregularity of the
cathedrals, churches, and castles which Chaucer had seen; and the variety
of uses sub-served by one and the same member of the edifice; columns
serving the purpose of water-drains, and the floor being at once a
ventilator and a dust-trap, securing conveniences of which he never
thought, and strangely different from the cumbrous contrivances employed
for such simple and necessary ends as were then contemplated,—would have
startled and discomposed him with a long-enduring surprise.  And, then,
the haste with which the beautiful dream has been wrought out into
well-compacted wood and glass and iron, the few months taken for its
completion—rapid as the growth of the _Victoria Regia_; and the thousands
of men engaged in its erection,—the preparation of the parts before they
were brought together,—the strange machinery employed in the
preparation,—the fact of the structure serving as a scaffold for
itself—and the small expense of the whole, not amounting to more than one
halfpenny per cubic foot,—these items in the history of the building
would surely have made him open his eyes and lift up his hands in wild
astonishment.

But the strangeness of the dream ends not here.  We must think of what is
included within this vast area, what is exhibited in its long aisles and
galleries where are gathered and arranged the productions of every art in
every clime—arts which five hundred years ago had no existence, and
climes then undiscovered.  Articles, a list of which will fill a portly
volume; the handiwork of man and woman in every sort of usable material.
Works of strength and skill for necessity and convenience—for comfort and
luxury—for ornament and display—things carved, and moulded, and
woven—vast and minute, bold and elegant, simple and elaborate, running
through all the conceivable departments and grades of inventive industry!
Groups, heaps, masses of all manner of cunning work!

And the whole of the contents in this hive of the world classified
according to the clime from which they come!  At the extreme east of the
edifice one sees the productions of America, our young and ardent rival
in ingenious toil.  Next are the fruits of rising art in Russia, with
specimens of skilful labour sent by Norwegians and Swedes.  There are
found rich stores from the shops of German craftsmen.  The Zollverein
exhibits its treasures in close vicinity to these; and beyond are seen
contributions from the provinces of Austria.  The Dutch, the Belgic, and
the French vie with each other further on; and close to them, Portugal,
Spain, and Italy also appear in friendly contest for the palm of
pre-eminence.  Switzerland, in the contiguous space, spreads out her
various wares, beside which Brazil and Mexico deposit their rich
freights; and then Egypt, Turkey, China, Greece, Persia, and Arabia, in
close neighbourhood, exhibit a harvest of oriental taste.  Crossing the
transept, at once a garden and a refectory—where, beneath over-arching
trees, and beside sparkling fountains, the spectator of this the world’s
great horn of plenty may refresh himself with various delicacies—he is
forthwith introduced to the products of the distant “Ind,” and the
numerous ramifications of our colonial dependencies, to terminate at
length this tour around the globe, performed under a case of glass, with
a sight of the immense assemblage of our home manufactures, gathered from
almost every town and village in the British Isles.  Nine miles of
table-room are thus passed in review; and it would require days and weeks
to circumnavigate this epitome of the manufacturing world, and only to
glance with anything like intelligence at the various divisions of its
affluent stores.  A traveller who has visited in detail the chief
manufactories of European countries must feel himself to be in a kind of
dream, when looking on these achievements of human industry brought
together, not merely from the English provinces, and the European
continent, but from the remotest regions of this and the other
hemisphere.  A dream, then, indeed, would it have seemed to the father of
English poetry, with his limited knowledge of geography and art, could he
have paced along these spacious alleys, lined with the peaceful spoils of
all the earth.

The sight of these interesting objects is suggestive of important
reflections.  Imagining oneself left alone in the vast building—permitted
to tread in silence the deserted halls—what musings might arise relative
to themes awfully beautiful, which the giddy portion of the daily crowd
within the walls have never entertained!

This repository of art, with all its varied contents, is the production
of the human mind.  Its constructive skill is singularly exhibited in the
edifice itself; not such constructive skill as can be confounded with the
instinct of the bird or bee, not a blind impulsive power; but a
clear-eyed intelligence, which can survey, and consider, and contrive,
and adapt, and fashion, according to the exigency of the case, in ways
more various than art can classify.  Of the power of human discovery, the
detection of latent qualities in nature, a remarkable example is afforded
in the history of the material out of which the building itself is
chiefly wrought.—That the vitrification of sand and nitrium, noticed
accidentally by the Phœnician mariners, according to the once generally
received account by Pliny; or that some other occurrence at a much
earlier period, as is now commonly believed, should have led men to
perceive, in materials perfectly opaque, capabilities of transformation
into a substance perfectly transparent; that out of dingy masses of
mineral could be spread forth sheets of liquid diamonds, broad as the
awning over the Coliseum at Rome; that it was possible to mould this
brittle material, as if it were so much wax or clay; that, hard as rock,
it might be blown into a bubble soft and light as a drop of water; that,
white as the sunbeam, it could receive and retain all the dyes of the
rainbow; constitute a series of marvels, forming but one out of a
thousand chapters included in the annals of human discovery.  The plastic
power of the human mind is also here displayed in the almost infinitely
diversified forms which, under its touch, the rude materials of nature
have received.  Timber and stone, cut into elegant shapes for useful
purposes, or with astonishing truthfulness made to resemble the most
delicate expressions of animated nature, even to the feather of a bird
and the petal of a flower!  Earth moulded by hand or machinery, and
metals wrought or cast in a thousand mimic fashions!

Nor should we omit to notice, in these objects of art, a deep desire to
embody in material things the _beau idéal_, to rise above the dull
purpose of mere utility and convenience, to give a touch of beauty to the
commonest aids and implements of life, to lift art to a lofty sphere, and
to surround it with a brilliant halo.  Man is seen as the lover of
artistic perfection, tasking his powers to conceive and execute what
shall at least approach a standard too lofty for him yet to measure, but
of the existence of which he has the consciousness, deep though dim.  He
may be said to fight a battle with the obstinate resistance of material
nature, and though oft defeated, still struggles for the victory!  The
spiritual takes possession of the physical, as a foreign realm, which it
seeks to subdue to its own purposes.  The _distinct essence_ of the soul
is also asserted.  Its attempt to rule over all around, and to enrich
itself with the spoils of the conquered region, is not a contest with a
co-ordinate and equal power, but it is the effort of a kingly nature so
formed by God, created in his image, and inaugurated into regal office,
at the beginning when the charge was given, “Replenish the earth and
subdue it.”  The superiority of the mind over all material nature is thus
unequivocally proclaimed.

And amidst all this, does he not catch glimpses of things purer, nobler,
and more enduring than the things of earth?  Does he not feel at times
that there are objects existing somewhere, incomparably more beautiful
than any work of art?  Has he not raised within him a conception of
invisible and spiritual realms more wonderful than the material?  And is
there not also to be recognised, in the ambition of the artist who
strives to produce a work which his admirers vainly call immortal, a
strong craving for some after-existence—a flinching from the thought,
that death is to put an end to all—a wish, at least, to impress some
characteristic idea of his own on some portion or particle of the great
whole of things, so that he may live by representation if not in
consciousness.

Yet, while such musings on the works of men open up to us deeps of power
and beauty in the soul, they only reveal a small division of the vast
world of human nature.  We visit but a single province of the
intellectual realm: we leave unexplored the vast domains enriched by the
growths of literature and science; while the emotions, social affections,
moral feelings, and religious capacities of the soul remain untouched.
No account is here taken of conscience, and of the capability of knowing,
loving, and serving his Maker, which form the highest distinction of
man’s nature.  Yet even from our partial and limited view of the subject,
we derive no slight conviction of the immortality of that nature to which
such attributes as we have described belong.  Great as may be the mystery
of a future existence, most certainly the mysteries connected with the
denial of this truth are greater still.  It involves the supposition that
what in nature, power, and capability is perfectly distinct from the
material form in which it dwells, and by which it works, is to perish
with it:—that the inmate is to die with the decay of his dwelling, the
artist expire with the breaking of his implement;—that a being possessed
of unbounded capacities of improvement is destined to advance only a few
steps in his proper career, and then be arrested in his course for
ever;—that a life of thought and feeling, which contains the germs of
higher thoughts and feelings, awaiting, as essential to their full
development, other influences than those which are shed on earth, is to
be succeeded by eternal unconsciousness and oblivion;—and that a soul
which finds in the present life a range too narrow for the full and
vigorous scope of its nascent powers and feelings, is to be disappointed
in its earnest longings and deep-seated hopes.  It involves the
supposition of a Divine design intimated, and then thrown aside—a Divine
promise pledged and broken.  The Great Architect would appear
constructing a portico as if introductory to a magnificent temple, and
then, suddenly stopping short in the work, breaking it down, and
scattering its beauty in the dust.

The construction of the Crystal Palace, with its contents, is a monument
to the superiority of mind over matter; and that superiority indicates
some great destiny hereafter.  Immortality rises upon the eye of reason
in the hazy distance: but confidence in relation to the future state must
come from another quarter, through the exercise of faith.  “Life and
immortality” are brought “to light through the gospel.”

Nor can we properly terminate reflections of this order without going
back to the source and origin of mind.  If the material universe bears
witness to the existence and character of a Great First Cause; if “the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made;” if “the heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his handiwork;” if the earth
be full of his goodness; how much more does the soul of man, with all its
capacities and powers, its intellect and genius, and, above all, its
moral and religious susceptibilities, bear testimony to the being and
attributes of the Creator.  The marks of design in the mind of man,
himself a designer, are more astonishing than those which we have in
visible things.  The power and beneficence of God, in giving us faculties
of thought and susceptibilities of affection, appear with a plainness of
expression even beyond what we discover in any of the material provisions
for our comfort.  While the whole universe is a volume in which God has,
as it were, written down his thoughts, what page in it is so wonderful as
the human mind?  Whatever is great or beautiful in the imagination of
man—whatever there is to admire in the works of his hands, fashioned
according to the intellectual type within, must be traced up to the
infinite source of intelligence, as its origin.  Man has nothing which he
has not received.  What then must that unrevealed fount of beauty be, of
which all the choice thoughts and beautiful imaginings of men from the
beginning, however they have been expressed, are but as drops and spray!




PART II.
CONTRASTS BETWEEN THE PAST AND PRESENT.


    “Fair land, by time’s parental love made free,
    By social order’s watchful arms embraced:—
    With unexampled union meet in thee,
    For eye and mind the present and the past;
    With golden prospects for futurity,
    If that be reverenced which ought to last.”

                                                               WORDSWORTH.

THE allusions we have made to Chaucer and his dream, in connexion with
the Crystal Palace, suggest some very obvious but interesting reflections
on the difference between the order of civilization which existed in his
day, and that which obtains in our own.  There are works of art and facts
of history associated with his times, and not entirely unassociated with
himself, which, by being brought under our review and placed beside the
Great Exhibition, with its treasures and purposes, will exhibit the
difference between the two epochs of our country’s progress in a
peculiarly striking light.  It should be observed however, in the first
place, that the fourteenth century, like the nineteenth, was an era of
progress.  The blooming of poetic genius after the long winter of the
middle ages, was in itself an indication that some new impulse had been
given to the mind.  The perfection which Gothic architecture attained at
the same period, in the bold proportions, the noble forms, the chaste and
elegant adornments, and all the grand and beautiful effects of the
decorated style—the revival too of mercantile pursuits which then took
place, owing very much to the influence of our third Edward, who to the
title of Hero of Cressy appended the better title of the Father of
English Commerce—were also signs and tokens of advancing civilization.
To these we should add the remembrance of the mental activity and
dialectic skill of the schoolmen then rife in our universities, fostering
a spirit of inquisitiveness, and promoting an independence of thought and
individuality of character, which could hardly fail at length to break
through the trammels in which for a long period they patiently toiled:
nor should we forget the bearing upon society and the spirit of the age,
of the early efforts at ecclesiastical and religious reformation
commenced by Wickliff and his compeers.

But between that past age of excitement and the present there are
contrasts bolder than any resemblance which can be traced.

Windsor Castle may be said to have been built in the middle of the
fourteenth century, when Chaucer was a youth; and with the completion of
some parts of the palatial edifice and the contiguous chapel he, as we
have seen, was associated.  That building was a sign not only of the
artistic, but of the social state of civilization at that period.  The
stern-looking old fortress of former times, the very symbol of feudalism,
the type of individual, firm, unconquerable resistance, was succeeded by
less forbidding piles of architecture; and—to adopt the idea of a French
writer at that period—the kingly and baronial edifices of the fourteenth
century relaxed somewhat their rigid features, and seem to “_laugh_”
through their oriel windows, as they looked down on the gay quadrangle
glittering with the arms and banners of chivalry.  But the royal building
at Windsor, though it was of the new order of architecture, and showed
that taste was re-establishing her empire,—though it evinced some advance
upon a previous condition of social disorder, when the rough net-work of
feudal government kept things together in a very loose and imperfect
manner, it also betrayed in its broad moats, machicolated towers, and
other grim-looking fortifications, that a period of social tranquillity
and quietude had not arrived.  It was still needful to have the
drawbridge and the sally-port, the loophole in the wall and the turreted
walk on the top for the bow-man.  The whole aspect of the place, with its
warden and garrison, indicated liability to baronial attack, or popular
outbreak.  It was to be inferred that peer, burgess, and peasant were
held still in some distrust, that law had not yet the strength of hand it
needed to check the pride of the rich and curb the passions of the poor.
We may look on Windsor Castle, as it stood in Chaucer’s time, as an
exponent of an unsettled state of society, when the great tumults and
agitations which had swept, wave after wave, over the European world had
not spent their force and died away.  The erection of a glass palace,
strong indeed and enduring, if untouched by violence, and preserved by
care, but, under opposite circumstances, frail and perishable in the
extreme; its open and unprotected situation on the skirts of the great
metropolis, and beside one of its chief and most frequented highways; its
full exposure to general observation, and its openness to the approach of
all, are facts which tell loudly in testimony of the altered state of
society in which our lot is cast.  Such a structure thus undefended is
out of all harmony with the bygone times to which we have just referred,
when tumults and deadly conflicts in the streets were of common
occurrence, when property was ever in danger of rapine and plunder, and
the approach to a city or town was left unlined by hedges lest they
should furnish convenience for ambush to the thief or assassin.  It
proclaims the supremacy of law, the exaltation of that invisible and
hallowed guardian of our rights, not only to a seat of physical power
whence it can make its mandates felt, but upon the throne of the public
mind, which has been taught reverently to bow before its majesty.  It
indicates the general education of the people—their improved intelligence
and taste—their better social habits—their acknowledgment of the rights
of property—their regard for order, and their love of peace.  It shows
that the last five hundred years have been years of social improvement,
and leads us to ponder the causes which have wrought the change.  Then
there pass in review, the decline of feudalism, the development of the
free principles of our constitution, the invention of printing, the
reformation of religion, the progress of arts and science, the
improvement of courts of justice, the institution of a well organized
police; but, above all, the efforts of the preacher and the schoolmaster,
those two most efficient labourers in the cause of moral civilization.
This large array of agencies, with many others here overlooked, have been
doing their silent work through hundreds of past years.  Here we have the
tillers of the soil, and the sowers of the seed, from which has sprung
the harvest of social order and security which crowns the middle of the
nineteenth century.

Referring again to the regal edifice reared by Edward III. we are
reminded of the method by which labourers were obtained for the execution
of the works.  Ashmole tells us, that to the end they might be _honestly_
and duly performed the sovereign issued letters patent to press hewers of
stone, carpenters, and other artificers, also to provide stone, timber,
and other materials.  They were gathered in London, and out of divers
counties in England, by virtue of writs directed to the sheriffs, who
were to take security that the workmen should not depart without license,
under the penalty of £100; and, because some left Windsor clandestinely,
proclamation was made to punish the fugitives with imprisonment in
Newgate, and any one who dared to employ them, with a forfeiture of all
his goods.  This circumstance, while it illustrates the small pecuniary
resources of the sovereign, throws a strong light on the condition of the
labouring classes.  The personal liberty of the subject was but half
conceded by the unconstitutional assumptions of the royal authority.  The
artisan was little better than a villain or serf, in whose labour the
monarch was supposed to have a vested and indefeasible interest.  The
latter was still, to a considerable degree, the great feudal lord of the
land, having a supreme proprietorship in the persons and possessions of a
vassal-like people.  Marvellous and happy is the change that has come
over England since then, as is shown by the history of the building
before us!  Not the product of a monarch, seeking to gratify his pride,
and to surround himself with luxury at the expense of his people; but the
enterprise of the people themselves by their own voluntary contributions,
commenced, indeed, and encouraged by the suggestion and patronage of a
prince illustrious and beloved—the erection of the Industrial Palace is
connected with no violation of the rights of property or labour.  If the
English working man has still some evils in his social condition of which
to complain—if his neck be still chafed by a yoke real or fancied—he
should remember that his condition is enviable compared with that of his
fathers.  His strength and skill are his estate.  He has the liberty to
sell them in what market he may think the best.  No regal mandate can
interfere with the perfect mastery which he claims over himself.  Not an
axe or hammer has been used in the building but by the free will of him
who wielded it.  The edifice looks more majestic than ever when
contemplated as the work of a nation of freemen.  The money freely
given—the labourers freely assembled—the work freely done.  The fact
proclaims to the world the wealth and liberty of England, the last the
best preserver of the first, and the sure pledge, we trust, under the
blessing of the Almighty, of her enduring power and growing prosperity.
“As the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall
long enjoy the work of their hands.”

Casting back once more a glance upon the fourteenth century, another
point of contrast presents itself between the past and present
significant of the condition of the arts, especially in connexion with
the religion of the times.  Loud has been the boast of the admirers of
the mediæval system in relation to its artistic aspects, with which,
however, it must also be remembered, that while a corrupt church
cultivated the imagination in subservience to its own superstitions, it
blinded the nobler faculty of reason.  That age certainly could boast of
beautiful trophies.  To say nothing of the architect whose cathedrals and
churches awaken the wonder of posterity, the sculptor chiselled his
images for the niche, the shrine, and the tomb;—the limner exercised his
infant skill upon the vellum pages of illuminated MSS., or in bolder
decorations for altarage and stall;—the stainer of glass dyed the windows
of the chapel, the convent, and the castle, so as to present pictures of
saints and heroes, or “a tissue of variegated crystals, a transparent
mosaic of gems, through which the light, like flame, might pass through
the varied pomp of earthly hues;”—the graver of brass preserved the
images of the dead in graceful outline, full of the expression of
deathlike repose, and therewith paved the choir and aisles trodden by the
feet of surviving worshippers;—the carpenter and the cabinet-maker
enriched their respective works with quaint but oftentimes picturesque
carvings;—the smith plied his art in the manufacture of metals into
various imitative forms, rearing iron screens of mimic architecture,
curiously adorning a lock, or elaborating the hinges of a door;—and the
goldsmith and jeweller fashioned and chased and studded with gems the
images and utensils employed in popish worship, and the salt-cellars,
bowls, chargers, and other pieces of plate, which sparkled on the festive
board of the prince and noble.  Between these works of art, _as such_,
and the productions of our own day, it is not our purpose here to
institute any comparison; we notice them now only _as signs of
civilization_, and the fact which they illustrate under this view is the
limitation of the employment of art at that time to a very few uses,
deemed sacred or noble.  All above the lowest class of artificers were
employed exclusively in the service of the church, and the highest
classes of the state.  They were dependent upon the Abbey or Castle, or
upon the rising wealth and budding taste of some city merchant.  The
people, in general, had nothing to do with works of art except to produce
them, or to gaze on them from afar in their religious worship, or when
they were permitted humbly to participate in the magnificent festivities
of their lordly superiors.  The houses, furniture, and vessels of all,
except the highest class, were of the meanest and most untasteful kind.
Rough and rude were all the arrangements of their dwellings, and all the
appliances of their domestic life; artistic beauty was absorbed and
concentrated elsewhere—no traces of it were to be found in the peasant’s
cottage, or even the tenement of the common burgess.  This fact, as
indicative of the condition of the people in reference to their domestic
civilization, is what, in the language of lord Bacon, may be styled “a
_glaring instance_”—one that stands naked and open,—and this in an
eminent manner, and in the highest degree of significance.

No one can survey the immense assemblage of articles in the Great
Exhibition without being struck with the signs they afford of a state of
civilization, the opposite of that just noticed.  Here Art is seen
extending its territory over all the regions of life.  If in the service
of religion among Protestants, she is not tasked as was once the case, we
do not deplore the circumstance.  Without a calm judgment and a pure
heart, she is apt to become in the so-called house of God, the
maid-servant of superstition.  Only up to a certain point was she allowed
to go under the Old Testament dispensation, when her services were
largely in demand for constructing and beautifying the tabernacle and
temple.  “Thou shalt not make unto thyself any graven image,” was a check
put upon the ingenious devices of a Bezaleel and an Aholiab, and upon all
“who had wisdom to devise curious works, to work in gold, and in silver,
and in brass, and in the cutting of stones, to set them; and in carving
of wood, to make any manner of cunning work.”  Under the present
dispensation, when the worship of the Father is to be in spirit and in
truth, in _contrast_ with the worship instituted by Moses, and therefore
not merely unformal and unhypocritical, (which pure worship always was
and must be,) but _un_symbolic, a still stronger restraint must be put on
the activity of artistic skill within the houses of prayer called after
the name of him who talked with the woman of Samaria.  The busiest and
most elaborate efforts of art are, therefore, as we conceive, properly
removed from the house of God, by his own solemn interdict upon their
employment there, lest man should make God’s most precious gift subject
to vanity,—while the faculty of ingenious invention seeks and finds full
scope for its exercise in increasing, multiplying, and adorning the
conveniences and comforts of life among all classes.  Art is mainly
intended to refine and ennoble what specially belongs to this mortal
life.  In this respect she has the power of elevating man’s social
condition by evoking and gratifying a taste for the beautiful; art is
seen thus fulfilling her mission in the myriad-achievements of human
skill which this Great Exhibition spreads with such lavish wealth before
spectators from all climes.  Passing beyond purposes of mere utility and
convenience, in the accomplishment of which, however, they abound, the
fabricators of all this various furniture for the homes of men, have
sought to breathe into it the spirit of the beautiful.  Not only does
elegance of design, and accuracy of execution, mark those costlier
productions which are intended for the drawing-rooms of the rich and
great, but they appear in the cheap and simple provisions for the
parlours and kitchens of the poor and humble.  Modern European society is
thus coming back to that pitch of artistic civilization which
distinguished old Greece in her palmy days, when “the plastic and
presiding spirit of symmetry shed its influence over the minutest details
of ordinary occupation, and the shapes of the commonest utensils.”  The
influence of fine art is thus rendered universal.  Civilization in that
form is seen generally diffused.  The sharp barriers of rank are broken
down, the grades of society under the touch of wide-spread taste
assimilate to each other; their boundary lines soften, become more and
more indistinct, and gradually melt away.

To return again to the age of Edward.  In the beginning of the year 1358,
says old Knighton in his “Chronica,” the king issued his royal
proclamation throughout all England, that all knights strangers from any
part of the world, who had a mind to come to the feast of St. Georges, to
be held on the 23rd of April, at Windsor, should have his letters of safe
conduct to pass and repass the realm at their pleasure, for the space of
three weeks without the least impediment or danger, there to partake
every one according to his degree and merit of those honours and prizes
which attended the princely exercises of jousts and tournaments.  And
accordingly this great feast was held, and thither went in their suits of
armour, and with devices emblazoned on their shields, with all the pomp
and circumstance of chivalry, John of France and the duke of Brabant, and
many noble lords and knights from “Almain, Gascogne, Scotland, and other
countries.”  Philippa, the heroic wife of Edward, and the queen of the
king of Scots, were present with a whole bevy of high-born dames to gaze
on the tilt and tournay.

Punctiliously, according to chivalrous custom, did the gorgeously coated
heralds and pursuivants proclaim and enforce the laws of the encounter.
Proudly did the combatants take lance in hand and rush to the
combat,—with eager eyes and beating hearts did matron and maiden look on
husband and lover,—and with boisterous shouts of joy did the crowding
populace hail the prowess of the conqueror.  The scene was typical of the
age.  It was an exposition of the spirit predominant in our own land, and
throughout Europe.  It indicated the martial genius of the nation.  It
was a spectacle to which the Englishman would point with patriotic
vanity,—just as the Roman would point, in the days of his great heroes,
to the Campus Martius, and the streets that led to the capitol, crowded
with the symbols and attendants of a triumph decreed by the republic as a
reward for the valour of her warlike sons.  Another prince not indeed
occupying the throne, but the loving and honoured consort of the
illustrious lady who fills it, has proposed a great English festival for
the year 1851, and in union, not merely with popular members of the
aristocracy but with distinguished representatives of commercial
enterprise, and industrial activity, has sent forth the challenge to all
lands, and invited people of all ranks to an earnest rivalry for crowns
of pre-eminence.  Thither have already arrived the weapons with which the
contest is to be decided, while multitudes are wending from the far east
and west to witness the array, to decide on who are the winners in this
strange conflict, and to award to each the prize he merits.  This
exhibition of art is beautifully significant of the times in which we
live.  It shows that the taste for arms is no longer predominant; that it
has yielded to predilections more worthy of human nature.  Bales of
merchandise and piles of manufacture are now beginning to be deemed more
worthy of regard and admiration, than blood-stained banners, bruised
shields, and splintered spears, with other trophies torn from the
vanquished.  The gauntlet of war is not flung down before the world, but
the gage of peace.  To the assemblage in Hyde Park—a fraternal
intermingling of the children of all lands, with their interchange of
ideas and sentiments, conveyed both to the eye and the ear, and the
healthful stimulus thus afforded to the further improvements of the arts
of human life—many of us are now pointing, not with pride but with
thankfulness to Providence, as interpretations of the new spirit that has
come over civilized society.  Nor can we omit to add that much as the
superiority of the military profession was vaunted in the olden time, and
strongly as may linger still in many breasts the remnants of that
prejudice, we believe that mankind are coming more and more to see that
the palm of preference belongs of right rather to him who deepens the
channels of industry, and circulates the streams of commerce.  To build
up and adorn must be better than to desolate—to nourish, comfort, and
gladden, than to fight and destroy; and if armies be still needful to
protect and defend, if we want them as a police to sustain and execute
the law of nations, let it be remembered that such a view can give
martial occupations no precedence in the estimation of the wise and
good—as he whose business it is to take captive or to punish the
violators of public order can never rank above those who minister
directly to the happiness and improvement of their fellow citizens.

Nor should we here forget the enduring character of those peaceful
victories won in modern times by discovery and invention, of which
multiplied mementoes are afforded in the treasures of the Hyde Park
Palace.  Most favourably do they stand out in contrast with the
evanescent nature of military power and valour.  “To whatever part of the
vision of modern times,” says sir Humphry Davy, “you cast your eyes, you
will find marks of superiority and improvement, and I wish to impress
upon you the conviction that the results of intellectual labour or
scientific genius are permanent, and incapable of being lost.  Monarchs
change their plans, governments their objects, a fleet or an army effect
their object, and then pass away: but a piece of steel touched by the
magnet preserves its character for ever, and secures to man the dominions
of the trackless ocean.”  All the discoveries of knowledge and their
application to practical uses are of this description, and we joyfully
compare them with the mouldering trophies of the warrior.  The spoils of
Cressy and Poictiers have long since perished—even the power which Edward
and his soldiers established in France soon declined and disappeared, and
long since left behind it only a name in history—but the results of
scientific study and artistic toil, which have produced the Great
Exhibition of 1851, are destined, we doubt not, to last to a remote
period, and to improve the condition and adorn the dwellings of unborn
millions of the human family.

In closing this chapter, we may remark that unlike the martial gathering
at the tournament of Windsor, the concourse of British subjects at the
present festival no longer exhibits the distinctions of feudal society.
Lordship and vassalage have happily become numbered among the things that
are past.  Whatever purposes they might subserve at a certain period,
they were badges of imperfect civilization, and have given place to a
condition of social order in which, though a graduated scale of rank very
properly obtains, the equal rights of men as intellectual and moral
beings are beginning to be acknowledged.  In this “passage” of arts, “not
arms,” the humblest are permitted to display their skill;—not as
aforetime, when the contest was confined to the men of high descent, the
poorest workman may place his productions beside those of the richest
sons of fortune.  The man who can make no boast of gentle blood, who can
appeal to no roll of ancestry, whose name is but of yesterday, who
simply, by dint of using his brains and his muscles, his thoughts and ten
fingers, has raised himself into notice is permitted and encouraged to
contend with the highest born for the prize of honour in these pacific
and generous rivalries.  This is not among the least pleasing of the
contrasts between past and present.




PART III.
VOICES OF HOPE AND WARNING.


                “The barrier flood
    Was like a lake, or river bright and fair,
    A span of waters: yet what power was there,
    What mightiness for evil and for good!
    Even so doth God protect us, if we be
    Virtuous and wise.”

                                                               WORDSWORTH.

THE invitation we have given to the world, to send its treasures to
enrich and bedeck our Crystal Palace, and its tribes to visit us, for the
sake not only of inspecting that great emporium but of witnessing our
national conditions under its various aspects, implies a conscious
greatness, on the part of our country, sufficient to warrant such a bold
and unprecedented step.  It would be presumptuous and idle for an
inferior state to ask her potent neighbours thus to honour her, and no
such state would venture on the experiment.  Indeed, the resources
necessary for carrying out so formidable an enterprise could not be at
its command.  Great Britain, while she assumes by her present conduct a
high standing in the rank of nations, can with perfect ease justify
herself in this respect.

Though the mother isle be a tiny speck on the map of the globe, her
colonial dependencies extend over the most remote latitudes.  Her entire
territory embraces an area of eight millions of square miles, exceeding
that of Russia by at least one million.  It is double the size of the
continent of Europe, and out of every six acres of dry land upon the
planet it claims one.  Two hundred and forty millions of subjects bow to
the sceptre of Queen Victoria, the largest united population in
existence, next to China.  Including the whole empire, a fifth of the
human family are subject to her sway.  Of this multitude, two hundred
millions dwell in India; so that, if that country only remained under
British rule, her Majesty could say to the potentates of Europe, “I am
equal to you all; for, taking all the men on the surface of the globe,
one at least out of every six owns me as supreme.” {54}  In the amount of
its revenue, the wealth of its commerce, the activity and productiveness
of its manufactures, the intersection of its country by roads, canals,
and railways, the cheapness and rapid communication of its postal system,
and the number of ships which crowd its ports, England knows no equal.
Other elements of greatness which cannot be reduced to statistic
calculation are to be added to these, such as our government,
institutions, laws, liberties and literature.

Dwelling upon the fact of our national greatness, so obviously suggested
to us by what is now taking place, we very naturally pause for a moment
to inquire into the causes of this distinction.  It is to be expected
that a combination of many influences and agencies will be found to have
contributed to the result.  That it is really so the facts of our history
abundantly prove.  The present state of Great Britain is, in the first
place, to be ascribed in no small degree to the peculiar character of the
races of whose offspring our population is in the main composed.  The
thriving myriads who people the cities, till the fields, man the vessels,
and constitute or rule the colonies of our country, are descendants of
robust and vigorous Teutonic tribes.  Saxon, Danish, and Norman were all
allied, and possessed a general resemblance in point of physical and
intellectual qualities, connected with specific differences, the blending
of which, by the intermingling of these families, could not fail to
produce very decided effects upon the character of their posterity.  The
influence of the peculiarities inherent in the natural constitution of
different races, once almost entirely overlooked by historians, and now
liable to be exaggerated by writers of a certain school, has stamped the
impress of its reality and power with conspicuous breadth and vividness
upon modern civilization in the contrast which exists between the people
of Teutonic and Celtic origin.  Our condition, in the next place, is to
be attributed to the physical peculiarities of our native land—to our
climate, which cannot have failed to affect not only our natural
temperament and health, but to some degree our mental phenomena, and to a
greater degree our social habits,—to the configuration, soil, and
geological strata of our beautiful island: its scenery giving a certain
cast and hue to the colouring of our imagination: its rich lands making
us an agricultural community: its metallic and coal mines inviting us to
task our manufacturing skill: and its vast range of coast-line, with its
facilities for the erection of ports and the construction of harbours,
impelling us to engage in maritime enterprise.  Our condition is further
to be ascribed to our insular position, which has led us to seek the
empire of the seas, and often preserved us from being ravaged by
invaders; while it has given a stimulus to our commerce, with its
peaceful and humanizing tendencies.  It is also to be traced to forms of
government and modes of society which prevailed during the mediæval age,
themselves springing from earlier political and social influences that
flowed from Roman and German springs.  It is as true of nations as of
individuals, that the child is father to the man; and old England—the
England which is—must have had its destiny in no small measure shaped by
young England—the England which has been.  From Roman law and usage,
Saxon witenagemotes and courts of justice, Norman baronial assemblies and
tribunals, and the welding or fusion of them together, so as to produce
in some cases a mutual interpenetration,—from these has arisen our
peculiar kind of government, political and legal; which, with all its
faults, whether in principle or administration, is an agency to which
under Divine providence we owe no small degree of our stability and
power.  The feudal training of a partly Saxon population, through so long
a portion of the middle ages, is a fact of great importance in our
history, and of potent bearing on us even at the present hour; and it may
be worth while to notice that the modern European empires which were bred
in the feudal school—England, France, and Germany—take decided precedence
of the states to the north and south, which grew up undisciplined by that
rude but effective process of education.  Our condition has been further
influenced most powerfully by the history of the last four hundred years.
By the wars of the Roses, which weakened the aristocracy and strengthened
the throne, by the political bearing of the Reformation, the rise and
progress of the puritan party in the state, the Civil War, and the
Commonwealth under Cromwell, all of which developed popular power, and
for a while trampled in the dust both crown and coronet.  To all this
must be added the Revolution of 1688, which adjusted the relation of the
three estates of the realm, so as to secure ever since a tolerable degree
of harmony in the mutual working of principles and interests, commonly
deemed antagonistic.  Past changes are the secret of our present
stability; the intestine wars of bygone centuries, which shock us as we
read their story, were really the harbingers of the national peace,
order, and security on which we recently congratulated ourselves when
wild revolutionary hurricanes swept over the thrones and institutions of
Europe.  Continental states, later in their hour of trial than ourselves,
have probably to go through somewhat similar eras of struggle yet, before
they can win the order and repose which we have received from the veteran
champions of English freedom, during the long fight of the seventeenth
century.  And, to sum up many other influences in one sentence—our
national position and character are to be connected with the study and
experience of our venerated forefathers—with their knowledge and wisdom,
acquired from what they read in the history of older nations, and what
they saw of modern ones—with their genius and practical sagacity, the
books they wrote, and the deeds they did—with the inventions of art, and
the discoveries of science, and the collision of sentiments, opinions,
and principles which have from time to time been freely expressed and
canvassed.  But the most powerful agency remains to be noticed.  Above
all, our national greatness is the result of Christianity, which has long
had a strong hold upon the hearts of multitudes, and which has indirectly
exercised a most beneficial influence on others who have had little
regard for its doctrinal principles.  The sternness of those German
tribes from whom we have sprung was not to be subdued; and those better
qualities, which mark us as a people, were not to be produced by any
power less than the divine power of the Gospel.  Christianity, during the
middle ages, even under the disadvantage of working through a corrupt
church, was the main stay of social order, and wrought out beautiful
results in individual character.  In its reformed developments it has
mainly contributed to the best and most valued of our social
improvements.  Our noblest heroes have been inspired by its celestial
spirit; our most precious institutions have felt the shapening touch of
its divine hand; the best portions of our literature reflect the
refulgence of its light.  And what there may be of virtue, integrity,
honour, benevolence, and piety in our land, is the offspring of the
heaven-sent truth written in the Bible.  It is not Christianity alone, we
grant, which makes us what we are; but, without Christianity, it is
utterly impossible to imagine that our civilization should have attained
its present zenith.  In connexion with the working of those marvels of
our time—electric telegraphs—it has been found that when a piece of paper
has been dipped in a certain chemical solution, a stream of electricity
passed over it will imprint the paper with beautiful tints and dyes.  So,
we may say, that if the other events and influences we have enumerated
have been like the chemical solution to the paper, preparing our country
for some high destiny, the introduction of the gospel, and its
continuance among us, has been like the electric stream passing over the
nation, covering it with the fair and beautiful colours which render it
the admiration of the world.  Nor should the early period of the
introduction and establishment of Christianity amongst us be overlooked;
for, if it had been delayed to a later period, it is obvious that the
circumstance must have proved exceedingly detrimental to our infant
civilization.  That early introduction and establishment we are apt to
regard as a matter of course, though there was no anterior improbability,
in the first centuries of the Christian era, of the religious fate of
Great Britain being otherwise than that of Eastern empires.  Our Island
might have attained a stereotyped condition, as India and China have
done, and neither received nor craved the Great Gift of God.  Then must
our civilization however have been correspondingly poor, imperfect, and
weak.  The arrival of Christianity in this western corner of the world,
some seventeen hundred years ago or more, to instruct us in divine truth,
and as a loving nurse to foster and cherish our nascent civilization,
then exposed in these rough seas like an infant in an “ark of bulrushes,”
was the result of a mission from Him, who is sovereign in all his ways,
and who chose us for his high purposes; not because we were “more in
number than any people, for we were the fewest of all people, but because
the Lord loved us.”

After reviewing the character and causes of our civilization, it is
natural to inquire what will be its coming destiny.  However some may
idly talk, our civilization is far from being necessarily progressive.
The history of the great powers of the ancient world reads us admonitory
lessons.  It is very affecting, after we have mused on Rome in her palmy
pride, and fancied we saw one of her great triumphal processions on its
way to the Capitol, so expressive of the warlike genius of the republic,
sweeping in a tide of living grandeur through the forum, so rich in
architectural splendour, to turn to a sentence like this in Eustace’s
Tour:—“The glories of the forum are now fled for ever: its temples are
fallen: its sanctuaries have crumbled into dust: its colonnades encumber
its pavements, now buried under its remains.  A herdsman seated on a
pedestal, while his oxen were drinking at the fountain, and a few
passengers moving at a distance in different directions, were the only
living beings that disturbed the solitude and silence that reigned
around.”  Equally affecting is it when pondering the story of Athens,
once the fairest city of the earth, with her statues and temples and
memorial tombs—her orators, philosophers, and poets—the very home of
artistic beauty and intellectual refinement,—to hear a traveller remark,
as he describes the present state of the once unrivalled Areopagus: “Let
us wade through the crisp and bearded barley to the Bema, whence
Demosthenes was wont to thunder,”—and to think that where the murmur of
his vast audience was once heard no sound is awakened now but the
rustling of the ears of corn under the passing wind.  Nor less affecting
is it to read in the old Hebrew prophet, the son of Buzi,—who saw visions
of God by the river Chebar,—the tale of the glory and the doom of Tyre;
to see her “situate at the entry of the sea,” when the builders have
perfected her beauty, and all her “ship boards” are of “fir trees”—with
“cedars from Lebanon” for “masts,”—and “the oaks of Bashan” for
“oars”—and “ivory brought out of the Isles of Chittim” for “benches,”—and
“fine linen with bordered work from Egypt for sails,”—and “the
inhabitants of Zidon and Arrad” for “mariners,”—and they of Persia and
Lud and Phut and Arrad are in her army men of war, who “hang their
shields upon the wall;” and the merchants “trade in her fairs” “in all
sorts of things;”—and she is “replenished and made very glorious in the
midst of the seas,” and her “wisdom and her understanding have got her
riches and gold and silver,” and “every precious stone is her covering,”
and “the princes of the sea” sit on their thrones and wear their
“broidered garments,”—and then to read her doom fulfilled to the letter:
“Behold I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many nations to come
up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come up, and they shall
destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her towers; I will also scrape
her dust from her, and make her like the top of a rock; it shall be a
place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea.”

To minds of imagination and sensibility, more sombre than sanguine, it is
not surprising that with these facts in remembrance the future decline of
this great empire should seem probable; and perhaps by such minds a
picture of its mother city in some coming age is painted so as to
resemble her precursors in the path of grandeur and decay:—And here and
there stand a broken arch of one of her bridges, the waters idly rolling
on, no richly freighted ships upon their bosom any longer; and yonder are
her once proud senate halls, a mouldering heap covered with wild flowers,
a solitude like the Roman Coliseum; and around the spot where now the
miracle of modern art is crowded by the people of all lands, there
stretches a solitary wilderness where the traveller rambles amidst
tangled grass and brushwood, and sits down and muses in some quiet dell,
left by the dried-up lake of the Serpentine, and haunted by memories of
the fall of London.  Calm and intelligent reflection however suggests
that there is far less of probability than poetry in such anticipations.

England is not like ancient Italy—London is not the antitype of Rome.  On
this account, in the first place, that the whole world has changed, and
especially the condition of the western nations in reference to each
other, since that memorable night when the trumpet of the Goth was heard
at the Salarian gate, and armed hosts came rushing along the broad
highway, and the soldier flung his brand in the house of Sallust, and the
shrieks of maidens and matrons mingled with martial shouts, and the
senators saw the old tragedy under the Gauls repeated—Rome surprised and
taken.  An empire hemmed all around by fierce warlike tribes might be so
broken down; but, in the modern world, where are the Goths and Huns and
Vandals to be found?  And, even if they did exist, the insular position
of Great Britain, and her maritime defences, would preserve her from the
kind of invasion which prostrated in the dust the old mistress of the
world.  Only a great civilized power, having large means of transport at
its command, could invade our shores.  To succeed, it must be a nation
eminent for skill and science, as well as for other resources,
considering the ample means of defence which, by aid of electric
telegraphs, steam, and railways, the government of our country could at
the shortest notice bring to bear on the spot endangered by assailants.

The contrast between Athens and England, as it regards their dangers, is
suggested in a remarkable passage of Xenophon.  He remarks that—“Athens
rules the sea; but as the country of Attica is joined to the continent,
it is ravaged by enemies, while the Athenians are engaged in distant
expeditions.  If the Athenians inhabited an island, and besides this
enjoyed the empire of the seas, they would, as long as they were
possessed of these advantages, be able to annoy others and at the same
time be out of all danger of being annoyed.”

The benefit of an insular position, which Athens did not command, is
possessed by England; and, as Montesquieu observes, “We might imagine
that the Greek historian and philosopher was speaking of our own
country.”  Athens was finally crushed by the Turks; but whatever
apprehension there once was of the invasion of the West by Mohammedan
arms, no such apprehension can ever be felt again; and if any likeness be
traced between the old Turkish and the present Russian Empire, the latter
threatens the East rather than Europe, and an invasion of England by an
army that must march through the German States, or by an armament sailing
from the Baltic ports, is among the wildest dreams of fear.  Then, going
back to the fall of Tyre, under the desolating hand of a Nebuchadnezzar
and Alexander, peril like hers, in reference to ourselves, seems next to
impossible; for the days of such conquerors are gone by for ever.  Even
the career of Napoleon was not the counterpart of them, nor could be in
the modern state of the world, with its large community of civilized,
powerful, and independent nations.

The danger of our country, then, is not from the invader; what we have to
apprehend in the future is discoverable in another quarter.  There are
two obvious possibilities which demand our attention: _first_, England
may be out-rivalled.  The youthful vigour of America, her art and
enterprize, her intelligence, her ardent patriotism, her vast and
ever-swelling territory and population, already afford some bold and
distinct indications of her future rapid advance—the son promising to
surpass the sire.  France and Germany, too, are full of latent resources,
and of that strong spirit which only needs wisdom to guide it in order to
their unprecedented enrichment.  And who can tell what Russia will be,
when thoroughly civilized?  Looking to the universal colonial
dependencies of England, which alone can give her territorial
importance—for her insular position prevents her from incorporating
foreign domains as integral parts of her own country—one can see the
possibility of great changes in the East: and then looking to our
colonies properly so called, who can deny the likelihood of their
throwing off the leading-strings some day, not we hope without filial
love for their mother state, to march in their own strength erect along
the paths of their high destiny?  And in Australasia, especially, there
may spring up a new England formed in the providence of God to vie with
and outstrip old England.  There is a _second_ possibility, from the
thought of which we shrink.  Looking, on the one hand, at the amount of
immorality and irreligion which already obtains amongst us, and at sins
for which, on account of general concurrence in them, the nation at large
may be held guilty, we have ground of alarm.  But, on the other hand,
when we take into account the extent of Christian virtue, piety, and
benevolence to be found in our land, we recognise grounds of hope.  Now
it cannot be denied that the latter instead of overcoming the former
_may_ leave it to prevail and triumph, and may itself decline.  A far
deeper depravation of public morals than we have mentioned may occur.  So
much of national truth and honour as is happily preserved may be
sacrificed to a base expediency.  Instances of commercial integrity may
become rare.  Domestic life and manners may lose their present purity.
Infidelity and superstition may divide almost all hearts between them.
Then is the doom of the country sealed.  Mortals are short-sighted as to
the relative position of the different states of the world in coming
times, the forecastings of the political philosopher are in many
instances disappointed, and the prudential measures of the wisest
statesmen often fail; but this is sure, that sooner or later a nation
will fall from the throne of her greatness, when she deserts the paths of
virtue and forsakes the counsels of God.  The sins of a people, if not
repented of, are certain ultimately to bring down upon them Divine
judgments.  Nor should it be forgotten, that such ascendency as ours has
its special temptations.  Plato, in his republic, guards against choosing
for his ideal commonwealth “such a site as by its proximity to the sea,
and other advantages for merchandise, navigation, and naval warfare,
would be liable to render the citizens too wealthy and overbearing, and
faithless in war and peace.” Commerce will be the mother of national
virtues when she is joined in wedlock with religion, otherwise she may be
fruitful in an abundant progeny of vice and crime.

Our danger, then, is internal rather than external.  And the same may be
said of old Rome, for had she been faithful and virtuous she had never
fallen under the barbarians’ sword.  It was also true of Greece.  And as
to Tyre, we are told on the highest authority, “By the multitude of thy
merchandise they have filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou
hast sinned: therefore will I cast thee as profane out of the mountain of
God, and will destroy thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the
stones of fire.”  We are convinced that only vice and impiety can ruin
us, that only virtue and religion will prove our invincible safeguards.
Should such a general state of depravity arise as that described by the
prophet, when judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar
off, and truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter, though
no army should land on our shores, and no foreign navy should touch our
fleets, and wealth and luxury should flow on, the curse of Heaven would
be on us, and our civilization would be corrupted to the core.  But let
the righteousness that exalteth a nation be ours, and then, however
strong and numerous our enemies, however prosperous and superior our
rivals, the arm of God would be our shield—though surpassed we should not
be dishonoured: but the destiny of our Empire would still be onwards
along the paths of moral civilization.

As Christianity has contributed so greatly to raise us in the scale of
nations, so that alone can enable us to preserve our standing.  Our
religion is as dear to hope as to memory.  The influence of the gospel
will equally prove the preserver of the highest good amongst us, and the
sure catholicon for the worst evils.  Whatever plans may be devised to
improve the physical and social condition of the people, the only remedy
that can touch the moral disease in the individual man, (and that, after
all, is the root of every social mischief) must be looked for in the
truths of the Bible and the agency of the Holy Spirit.  No dream can be
more wild and visionary, more at variance with the ancient and modern
story of mankind, than to suppose that any changes in the government or
laws of a country will of themselves ensure the happiness and prosperity
of a nation.  Political revolutions the most fair and promising have
often proved abortive.  It is beyond all doubt a righteous duty to bring
the framework and machinery of our social world as near to perfection as
it is possible; wise organization is eminently subservient to a nation’s
welfare: but our strongest and best hopes for the future security and
advancement of the English commonwealth are firmly fixed on the personal
regeneration of its members through the Divine power of the gospel of
Christ.  Earnest, indefatigable, patient, humble, holy endeavours for the
application of that heavenly gift to the hearts of our countrymen are in
the first rank of our social duties.

And looking for a moment away from home; taking in at one broad glance
the moral and religious condition of the British empire, what awful and
startling facts arrest our attention, full of irresistible appeals to
Christian consciences.  “Our queen rules over more Roman Catholics than
the pope, over more Mohammedans than the Sublime Porte, and over more
pagans than the whole continent of Africa.  If we ask, ‘What is the
religion of the British Empire?’ judging by numbers, the unhesitating
reply must be, paganism.  It contains more Mohammedans than Christians of
both names, and more pagans than Mohammedans and Christians together.”
These facts are indeed voices of warning!  What is to be expected, if
English Christians do not vastly increase their missionary efforts in our
world-wide dependencies, for whose moral and spiritual condition we must,
from the circumstance of their dependency, be in a high degree
responsible?

In connexion with strenuous efforts at home and in our colonial
provinces, near or remote, for the diffusion of Christianity “pure and
undefiled,” it is our solemn duty to abound in “supplication and
intercessions.”  We are sure that prayer did save Israel, and might have
saved Sodom.  Its influence, as revealed in the apocalyptic vision of
John, is so great, that it is seen shaping the course of history.  Great
changes come—judgments, penal and purifying, among the rest—as the result
of prayer:—“And I saw the seven angels who stood before God; and to them
were given seven trumpets.  And another angel came and stood at the
altar, having a golden censer: and there was given unto him much incense,
that he should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden
altar which was before the throne.  And the smoke of the incense, which
came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God out of the
angel’s hand.  And the angel took the censer, and filled it with fire of
the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices, and
thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.”  With that “door opened
in heaven,” and the light from it falling on the page of our national
annals, can we doubt that Christian prayer has had influence upon the
destiny of our empire?  Who shall unravel all the threads of influence,
knitting up men’s hearts in courage and heroism, which proceeded out of
days of prayer and fasting in Puritan times, and all the healing virtue
brought down by it upon a wounded and bleeding country?  And who can tell
how much England, in her hour of need, when under James the Second the
threatening clouds of papal despotism began to gather, was indebted for
the scattering of the storm to the voice of prayer?  And, since then, how
many critical junctures have occurred, when results have been produced
not to be adequately accounted for by any visible cause, and therefore
indicating some other agency at work which worldly minds take no note of,
but which the devout will recognise in the wrestlings of holy prayer!
The throne of grace, under which our fathers took refuge in times of
heavy trial must be our resort if we would preserve the religious
privileges they have handed down to us, and defend and enlarge the vast
heritage of national good which they bequeathed.




PART IV.
ASSOCIATIONS, SECULAR AND SACRED.


    “By these mysterious ties, the busy power
    Of Memory her ideal train preserves
    Entire; or when they would elude her watch
    Reclaims their fleeting footsteps from the waste
    Of dark oblivion: thus collecting all
    The living forms of being, to present
    Before the curious aim of mimic art
    Their longest choice: like Spring’s unfolded blooms
    Exhaling sweetness, that the skilful bee
    May taste at will, from their selected spoils,
    To work her dulcet food.”

                                                                 AKENSIDE.

ENDOWED as we are with a principle of suggestion—one of the most active
principles in the human mind, ministering greatly to the pleasures of
existence, and giving to men of enlarged intelligence the means of
various and extensive gratification—it is very natural, on looking at the
great event of the present year, to cluster round it in thought a number
of facts bearing in relation to it some kind of affinity.  Even the
structure and its contents are not without suggestive interest, while the
great gatherings of the people to behold them excites the memory and
imagination, and brings out many a picture of things that have been or
that shall be.  Associations are suggested, commercial and classical,
romantic and religious.

As a simple exposition of art, the Exhibition reminds us, in the first
place, of the Expositions of Art in the French metropolis, which at
intervals have taken place during the last fifty years.  We go back to
the times of the first republic, when after the tragedies of the
revolution, and their dire effect on industry and commerce, it was felt
that some stimulus and encouragement were needed to revive them; and the
deserted palace of St. Cloud, under the superintendence of the Marquis
d’Avèze, was enriched and adorned with the productions of a people whose
tasteful ingenuity no social disorders could extinguish.  The walls were
hung with costly draperies from the Gobelin manufactory—the floors were
covered with rich carpets from the looms of La Savonnerie, and, amassed
in profusion and arranged with skill, there was a display of the
variegated porcelain of Sevres, that hive of curious industry which
borders the spacious park of the palace we have mentioned.  Succeeded by
a second Exposition at the Hotel d’Orsay, in the city of Paris, the two
were regarded by Napoleon,—who, though flushed with his early victories,
failed not to discern that war without commerce would but exhaust his
country,—as sufficient to warrant a third and greater attempt, and
accordingly the Temple of Industry, as it was called, was reared in the
Champ de Mars.  It was of simple construction, adorned with oriflames,
and the victorious tricolours of the first Italian campaign, and within
the walls there were exhibited for three days, some of the most beautiful
works of art the country could supply.  The temper of that great nation
at the juncture was candidly expressed by the prime minister: “Our
manufactures are the arsenals which will supply us with the weapons most
fatal to the British power;” and as we read his words we rejoice in the
far different relations of the two empires now, and the pleasant union
and amicable rivalry of our Gallic neighbours with ourselves in the
present enterprise.  Other Expositions followed, but the ninth, under
Louis Philippe, in the magnificent Place de la Concorde, in the year
1839, eclipsed them all; and as the gratified monarch gazed on the
trophies of French ingenuity and skill, he exclaimed, “These are the true
victories which cause no tears to flow.”  Nor can we, while these
imposing scenes in the French capital and its neighbourhood pass before
us, forget the humble attempts made in our own country in connexion with
our valuable Mechanics’ Institutions, to exhibit in some of our large
towns, especially Manchester and Leeds, the products of native industry.
They are worthy of honourable and grateful remembrance, as indications of
that indomitable and individual spirit of enterprise, which is one of the
secrets of our commercial prosperity.

The Exhibition is a great Bazaar.  It is, to a considerable extent, based
on the true principle of such establishments.  That principle is one of
classification, and therefore the term Bazaar is incorrectly applied to
certain marts in the metropolis which are but heterogeneous clusters of
shops under a common roof.  The original principle is a classification of
products according to the trades to which they belong; here it is a
classification of products according to the countries from which they are
received.  The Bazaar, as essentially oriental, carries us away to Cairo
and Constantinople, to Persian towns and Indian cities.  We find
ourselves in the crowded alley of some vaulted building, with shops of a
similar kind presenting goods of the same general description, lining
either side the way.  Provisions, wares, and fabrics, both mean and
gorgeous, rude and ornamented, simple and ornate, are piled or spread
forth to please and entice the passer-by, while, in some cases, the moody
Turk, who sits cross-legged amidst his stores, smoking his pipe, is so
absorbed in the enjoyment of that soporific luxury, that he seems hardly
to care about attending to the wants of his customers.  In Persia, we are
told, the buildings are of rich appearance, decorated with paintings,
particularly under the domes, with portraits of hunters and heroes, and
pictures of animals, real or imaginary.  Generally in the East these
markets are places of immense resort, including the characteristics of an
exchange, a news room, a debating theatre, a promenade, and a rendezvous
for idlers.  The gaiety of oriental costume affords a marked feature in
the promiscuous assemblages, while the noise of many voices, in various
tongues and dialects, is like the echo of that strange confusion of
sounds once heard on the plains of Shinar.  In this respect the mixed
scenes and various languages in the Hyde Park Bazaar will be less
surprising to the Eastern visitors than to the people of the West.  It
will seem to them the augmented and multiplied counterpart of one of
their own busy markets—a city-like mart, an immense assemblage of shops
beneath one crystal roof—and embosoming in the midst of it a pleasure
garden, with great trees, and fresh flowers, and gushing fountains—the
whole the work, as they might think, of some of their most famous
magicians.

The spirit of industrial activity and commercial competition creates all
these scenes, and as we trace them to their source we cannot help
noticing the desire of acquisition, one of the original principles of
human nature, which often and most generally kindles and keeps that
spirit alive.  The desire of gain, regulated by justice and generosity,
is to be distinguished from that love of money which is so strongly
reprobated in the best of books, as “the root of all evil;” but it cannot
be denied that the innate acquisitiveness of man which may be trained up
into a virtue is too apt to sink down into a vice.  Influenced by a moral
feeling, especially by those considerations which Christianity suggests,
and by those precepts which Christianity enjoins, this principle prompts
individuals to gather only that they may prudently appropriate a
befitting portion, and generously distribute the rest; but apart from
these checks and guides, and stimulated by the sordid passions of man’s
fallen soul, the natural tendency to acquire, in a multitude of cases,
degenerates into the sin of covetousness, which is idolatry, and he who
makes haste to be rich becomes a worshipper of Mammon.  Nor can we here
omit to notice what a wonderful spring of human energy; what a motive to
exertion has the material wealth of this world ever proved; how, perhaps,
even beyond the highest prizes of warlike ambition, it has more
frequently and continuously agitated the surface of society, and moved it
from its lowest depths.  It has been like a strong east wind sweeping
over the world from the earliest ages, and keeping the sea of civilized
life in constant commotion.  As we read the history of commerce, and
think of the mercantile cities of antiquity, Tyre, Corinth, Alexandria,
and the rest—as we trace the stream onwards through the middle ages, by
the way of Amalfi, Venice, and Genoa;—as we descend to latter times, and
touch on Amsterdam, Bruges, and Louvain, and then come home and muse on
the rise and rivalry, the progress and changes of the great centres of
commerce in our own country;—as we pause in each place to look at the
busy traffic going on within them, to the crowded quays, the well-stored
warehouses, the mart of the trader, the shop of the artisan;—as we see
groups of merchants, mechanics, and mariners;—as we listen to the buzz of
many lips, and the noise of unfurled sails, and vessels loosened from
their moorings, the tramp of men piling up bales of goods, the click of
the shuttle and clangour of the anvil, we have an impressive illustration
of the high estimate of that material wealth, which it is the object of
all this energetic activity to produce and preserve.  Percival’s
description of the pearl fishery at Ceylon—itself a branch of most
profitable traffic, and exhibiting a scene of bustle akin to that of an
oriental bazaar—may be regarded as a parable of the great world-mart we
are thinking of, and of the precious prize which the thousands who throng
it all covet to obtain.  Several thousands of people of different
colours, countries, casts, and occupations, continually passing and
re-passing in a busy crowd: the vast numbers of small tents and huts
erected on the shore, with the bazaar or market-place; the vast numbers
of jewellers, brokers, merchants of all colours and all descriptions,
both natives and foreigners, who are occupied in some way or other with
the pearls, some separating and assorting them, others weighing and
ascertaining their number and value, while others are hawking them about,
or drilling and boring them for future use; “all these circumstances tend
to impress the mind with the value and importance of _that object which
can of itself create this scene_.”  On reading this description it
suggests another parable, a holy one from the holiest of lips.  “The
Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a merchant seeking goodly pearls: who,
when he hath found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he
had and bought it.”

Wandering far back into the regions of classic antiquity, the finger of
association points to Olympia and her games, those Greek celebrations of
which such graphic sketches are preserved in the triumphal odes of
Pindar.  Though “the immediate object of these meetings was the
exhibition of various trials of strength and skill, which from time to
time were multiplied so as to include almost every mode of displaying
bodily activity, they became subservient to the interests of genius and
taste, of art and literature.”  Statues were reared to the memory of
successful combatants, “and the most eminent poets willingly lent their
aid on such occasions, especially to the rich and great.  And thus it
happened that sports, not essentially different from those of our village
green, gave birth to master-pieces of sculpture, and called forth the
sublimest strains of the lyric muse.”  “The scene of the Olympic Festival
was during the season a mart of busy commerce, where productions, not
only of manual but of intellectual labour, were exhibited and exchanged.
In this respect it served many of the same purposes which, in modern
times, are more effectually indeed answered by the press, in the
communication of thoughts, inventions, and discoveries, and the more
equable diffusion of knowledge.” {91}  But these memorable institutions
are suggested to us in the way of resemblance, chiefly on account of the
vast and various concourse of persons which they periodically attracted.
At the time when the games returned, the banks of the Alpheus became a
centre of universal interest, and exhibited a pilgrim population typical
of a congregated world.  The festival “was very early frequented by
spectators, not only from all parts of Greece itself, but from the Greek
colonies in Europe, Africa, and Asia, and this assemblage was not brought
together by the mere fortuitous impulse of private interest or curiosity,
but was in part composed of deputations, which were sent by most cities
as to a religious solemnity, and were considered as guests of the
Olympian god.”  It is curious to observe—in contrast with the inclusion
of so many of the female sex in our gathering of the nations, the
circumstance illustrative of the different position of woman in society
in the old classic world—that, with the exception of the priestesses of
Ceres, and certain virgins, none but men, during the earlier periods of
Grecian history, were permitted to appear in Olympia at the time of those
national festivities.  The history of this remarkable institution,
through the many ages in which Greece was the pattern and mirror of
artistic, intellectual, and social civilization, exhibited that
civilization in its rise, progress, and decay—its spring-tide freshness,
summer pride, and autumnal beauty.  There might the hand of providence be
seen, disclosing, expanding, and then folding up forms of thought, modes
of association, and habits of life, which while they actually existed
gave much of their own impress to the foreigners who were gradually
familiarized with them, and will long continue, through the medium of
their history and their remains, to refresh the imagination, stimulate
the genius, chasten the taste, and arouse the emulation of mankind.

Other associations, which belonging to the mediæval ages may be grouped
together under the class of romantic, next occur to our minds, bringing
in procession before us a train of images nearer in point of time, but
more remote in point of resemblance.  We think of the rich old
picturesque cities of Europe, which sprung up, after the fall of the
Roman Empire, in Spain, and France, and Germany, and the Netherlands, a
hardy and robust offspring, born in troublous times, cradled amidst
storms, thrown on the world in infancy to take care of themselves, and
gathering, like individuals, strength and nerve and wit and prudence from
this rough and irregular sort of training:—and forthwith the
quaint-looking narrow streets are seen crowded with flocks of foreign
visitors to drive a bargain in the bourse, or to barter their wool at the
staple, or to mingle in the amusements of some civic festival.  And
amidst the concourse of merchants, and pedlars, and workmen may be seen
the knight and the squire, the monk and the minstrel.

    “Quaint old towns of toil and traffic, quaint old towns of art and
    song,
    Memories haunt their pointed gables, like the rooks that round them
    throng.
    Through these streets so broad and stately, these obscure and dismal
    lanes,
    Walked of yore the master-singers chancing rude poetic strains.
    From remote and sunless suburbs came they to the friendly guild,
    Building nests in Fame’s great temple, as in spouts the swallows
    build.”

    “I beheld the pageants splendid that adorned those days of old;
    Stately dames like queens attended, knights who bore the fleece of
    gold;
    Lombard and Venetian merchants, with deep laden argosies;
    Ministers from twenty nations, more than royal pomp and ease.” {94}

And, then, Venice is seen, rising out of the sea—a “mazy dream of marble
palaces, old names, fair churches, strange costumes, while the canals are
like the silver threads, the bright unities of one of sleep’s well-woven
visions.”  Within that great city—the modern Tyre, her history full of
warnings pointed at pride, cupidity, ambition, and tyranny—are seen her
merchant princes, with strangers from other lands, “Greek, Armenian,
Persian,” meeting together in busy excited crowds to look on the wares
and treasures supplied by her richly freighted ships; nor can we help
glancing at the annual festival of that commercial republic, when, to use
the words of Rogers,—

          “The fisher came
    From his green islet, bringing o’er the waves
    His wife and little one, the husbandman
    From the far land, with many a friar and nun,
    And village maiden, her first flight from home,
    Crowding the common ferry.  All arrived:
    And in his straw the prisoner turned and listened;
    So great the stir in Venice.  Old and young
    Thronged her three hundred bridges.”

And then these cities disappear, and give place to some curiously carved
chapel—a gem of architecture—within whose dim aisles there gather groups
of pilgrims from far-off places, to pay their vows and offer their gifts
at the shrine of a popular saint.  Walsingham and Canterbury show eager
and zealous worshippers, coming from distant towns and other lands, to
kneel with ignorant and superstitions reverence on the altar steps, and
to help by their genuflexions to deepen the indentations on the wave-like
surface of the floor.  And then again our thoughts wander away to
Mediterranean ports, and pilgrims are seen gathering there to go forth on
a more formidable expedition to the Holy Land, and as the vessel weighs
anchor, the old church hymn, the _Veni Creator_, chanted by the sailors,
is heard stealing over the waters, as they spread their canvass to the
wind.  Nor can we forget that even these gatherings, with all their
superstition, folly, waste of time, and pernicious moral influence,
nevertheless enlarged the circle of human knowledge, and the domains of
civilization, and corrected errors in geography, and wore away prejudices
between race and race, and promoted the interests of commerce and
navigation; and, towards the latter part of the mediæval age,
contributed, by the knowledge which many of those who visited Rome
acquired respecting its corrupt and licentious court, to create and swell
that deep tide of anti-papal feeling which preceded the Lutheran
reformation and promoted it when it came.  Far greater crowds than ever
are seen, in the eleventh century, embarking: in the richly painted
galleys of Genoa and Venice, on their way to the East.  Zeal for the
Crusades was the very spirit of the times, fanned in some instances and
kindled in others by the eloquence of Peter the Hermit.  Europe
precipitated itself into Asia, and multitudes who marched on foot, as
well as those who crossed the Mediterranean, appeared on the plains of
Palestine.  Rarely has our world, which has so often witnessed the
gathering of armed men, seen such a host as met the eye of our Richard
Cœur de Lion when he reached Acre.  “Around the city spread the camp of
the besiegers, a collection of warriors from every country in Europe,
with their separate and appropriate standards.  The walls of the place
were manned by its resolute defenders, urging their active engines of
warlike defence.  Beyond, at a visible distance, the powerful army of
Saladin appeared covering the hills and plains: their tents radiating
with the gorgeous colours so precious to Turkish taste.”  The Crusades
wasted an immense amount of wealth, sacrificed human life to an awful
extent, and were productive of intense misery in various forms.  But, as
in the case of all great gatherings of the human race for a common
purpose, the evils were in the main temporary, the good produced
permanent.  They did on a large scale what pilgrimages did on a small
one.  They tended to undermine the system of feudalism and to sow seeds
of liberty.  Men were waked as by a thunder-clap from the slumber of
centuries.  A movement was produced in society, the impulse of which
never died away, for from that era European affairs underwent a change;
intellectual, moral, political, religious life began afresh to throb
through the Western world, and never since have men completely gone to
sleep again.

Transported in imagination to Palestine, the eye travels from the
processions and crusades of former days to assemblages in modern times,
animated by a like spirit of superstition; and among scenes of this kind
such a picture as the following occurs on the banks of the Jordan, by the
fountain of Elisha, detaining the fancy by its poetical interest, while,
as an expression of blind and misguided feeling improperly termed
religious, it fills with melancholy reflections the mind which has been
enlightened by true piety.  “I estimated the number of persons encamped
upon the plain before Jericho at 2,500, including a singular variety of
languages and costumes.  There was scarcely a people under heaven among
whom Christianity is professed without its representatives here.  There
were Copts, Greeks, Armenians, Catholics, Protestants from Abyssinia,
Egypt, Asia Minor, Turkey, Greece, Malta, Italy, France, Spain, Austria,
Poland, Prussia, Russia, Great Britain, America, and I believe all or
nearly all other Christian lands.  Cossacks were very numerous, and were
distinguished for their equipages and personal bearing among a motley
assemblage, which could hardly claim to be less than semi-barbarous.
This was no mean opportunity to study customs and costumes, when a walk
of two or three minutes brought under your inspection the Egyptian dining
upon an onion and a doura cake, the Syrian with his hands full of curds,
the Armenian feasting on pickled olives or preserved dates, the Cossack
devouring huge pieces of boiled mutton, and the European and American
seated around a box, serving the purpose of a table, covered with the
usual variety of meats and drinks demanded by the pampered appetite of
civilized man.  As it grew dark, a multitude of fires was kindled
throughout the camp and in the grove adjoining, which threw their strong
glare upon these very characteristic curious groups, and gave the fullest
effect to the picturesque scene.  The red caps, the huge turbans, the
vast flaunting robes of striped silk or scarlet, the coarse shaggy jacket
and bag trousers of the Cossacks, the venerable huge beards and bare feet
and legs of the orientals, all seemed part and parcel of the human beings
who lay nestled together upon the ground like domestic animals, or moved
about the illuminated area, thus varying and multiplying by every
possible change of light and shade the phases and hues of all that
appears grotesque and fantastic to an eye accustomed to the graver modes
of the western world.”

And now that a chain of rather wild but not uninteresting suggestions has
brought us to the Holy Land, other thoughts, sacred and divine, bind us
there for a while, strengthened by the sight of many a foreign and
home-born visitor among the actual crowd, within and about the great
Crystal Palace, unmistakably of Israelitish origin, the descendants of
the men who possessed the country in her better days.  And there, on the
summit of Moriah, stands an edifice devoted neither to war nor wealth, to
the advancement of art or to the gratification of pleasure, but to the
service of the God of the whole earth.  “A mountain of snow,” it seemed
to the Roman Titus, “fretted with golden pinnacles.”  But, with an
attractiveness surpassing that of material beauty, it revealed itself to
the lingering eyes of large companies at their holy feasts two thousand
years ago, as they at length touched the summit of some one of “the
mountains which stood round about Jerusalem.”  They came over hill and
dale, through mountain pass and by river stream, singing the songs of
Zion, and rehearsing glorious things spoken of the city of God.  At many
a cottage door, and village border, and city gate, groups of Israelites
young and old, with smiling faces and beating hearts, fell into the
augmenting crowd; which, as it rolled on, resembled the “swelling of
their own Jordan.”  They came “upon horses, and in chariots, and in
litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to the holy mountain.”
Thither “the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.”  There was “little
Benjamin with their ruler, the princes of Judah and their council, the
princes of Zebulun, and the princes of Naphtali.”  They entered “through
the gates into the city.”  The Jew from “Dan” met the Jew from
“Beersheba,” and he who dwelt “by the haven of ships,” saluted his
brother from “the other side of the river.”  Lover and friend,
acquaintance and “kindred according to the flesh,” fell upon one
another’s necks and kissed each other.  The old man with his “staff in
his hand for very age” saw “his children’s children and peace upon
Israel.”  The “streets of the city were full of boys and girls playing in
the streets thereof.”  “There was a voice of noise from the city—a voice
from the temple.”  “They went up to the house of the Lord.”  The priests
were “clothed with salvation, the saints shouted for joy.”  “The singers
went before, the players on instruments followed after, among them the
damsels playing with timbrels.”  “They praised his name in the dance, and
sang praise unto him with the timbrel and the harp.”  They “brought an
offering and came into his courts.”  “They came to the altar of God.”
“They compassed it round about.”  They beheld “the beauty of the Lord,
and inquired in his temple.”

One year stands out in the history of those gatherings before which every
other fades.  Then _our_ passover was slain.  Then the day of the world’s
pentecost was fully come, and great was the gathering.  The multitude
without the gates who were assembled to gaze on that spectacle before
which, at its close, “the sun was darkened,” saw an inscription, in the
threefold language, of which there was a pregnant meaning that Pilate
little thought of—“It was written in Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew,” the
three great languages then spoken on the earth.  Men who had used these
languages from infancy were there.  Representatives of the world were
there—the Roman centurion was there—Simon the Cyrenian was there
{103}—multitudes of the Jews were there.  And as they deciphered that
strange writing, the various tongues in which the title of the Divine
Sufferer was expressed was a sign that in Him, the Roman, Greek, and
Israelite would find a Saviour and a Lord.  The three languages “which
like gold threads bind up the history of the ancient world,” were here
beautifully entwined to tell the teeming crowd of one for whose coming
all the changes in the story of their respective nations had, in the
comprehensive working of Divine providence, prepared.  The cross of
ignominy, at the sight of which they shuddered, was the threshold he must
needs pass to enter his kingdom and ascend his throne, there to sway over
them a sceptre at whose touch their hearts would bow and be rid of the
burden of sin and guilt,—while their mutual antipathies would melt away,
and He who had brought them peace would make them one for ever.  “The
Roman, powerful but not happy—the Greek distracted with the inquiries of
an unsatisfying philosophy—the Jew bound hand and foot with the chain of
a ceremonial law,” would find in Christ crucified the power of God and
the wisdom of God; and, in the superscription of his accusation, read
wondrous words of “peace, pardon, and love,” to all the dwellers upon
earth. {104}

Seven weeks afterwards and again there was a gathering.  “They were all
with one accord in one place.  And suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting.  And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as
of fire, and it sat upon each of them.  And they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave
them utterance.  And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men,
out of every nation under heaven.  Now when this was noised abroad, the
multitude came together, and were confounded, because that every man
heard them speak in his own language.  And they were all amazed and
marvelled, saying one to another, Are not all these which speak
Galilæans?  And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were
born?  Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in
Mesopotamia, and in Judæa, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia,
and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and
strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, we do hear
them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of God.”

“And the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.
And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking
bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and
singleness of heart, praising God, and having favour with all the
people.”  Then was the beginning of that ingathering of souls which the
Redeemer of the world predicted when he uttered those amazing words: “I,
if I be lifted up from the earth will draw all men unto me.”  Then he
began, and still he continues that infinitely gracious work, in the
accomplishment of which he unites a fallen and divided race together by
uniting them to himself.  The moral world has been, as it were, riven by
an earthquake—consumed by an internal fire—and he undertakes to reunite
and restore it.  He employs his cross as the point around which the whole
mass of regenerated humanity is to collect: indeed, by the simple virtue
of that cross, he accomplishes the change, and constitutes it the axis on
which the “new earth” shall rest and revolve.  The attraction is
invisibly going on, and the successful issue shall be at length
developed.  To him shall the gathering of the people be.  They shall come
not as captives, but as those who choose his service “to worship before
him in his holy mountain.”  “The abundance of the sea shall be converted;
the forces of the Gentiles shall come.”  They shall “fly as a cloud and
as doves to their windows.”  “The isles shall wait” on him.  “The ships
of Tarshish first, to bring his sons from afar.”  “He will gather all
nations and tongues, and they shall come and see his glory.”  “He shall
set up an ensign for the nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of
Israel.  The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of
Judah shall be cut off.  Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall
not vex Ephraim.”  Thus the divided world shall be made one in a way
infinitely transcending the ambitious dreams of an Alexander or Napoleon.
The moral dispersion, of which that at Babel was the type, shall be
reversed; men shall be united in religion and love: and the lines of
human interest, like the radii of a circle, concentrating in spiritual
obedience and the glory of Christ, shall no longer confusedly and in
strife cross each other as they do now, and ever must, while a base
selfishness makes each man his own centre.

Lifted into this mood of feeling, so much loftier than that with which we
began the chapter, we cannot close without turning a reverential gaze on
other gatherings, in that state of being on whose precincts we and all
the multitudes around us every moment tread.  There is the gathering in
the grave, “the silent waiting-hall where Adam meeteth with his
children.”  “The chief ones of the earth, the kings of the nations,” are
“brought down there and the worm is spread over them, and the worms cover
them.”  And “there the rich and the poor meet together.”  “The small and
the great are there.”  Who can count the sands on the sea shore—and who
can cast up the number of the dead?  Vast as it is already, the concourse
in the great city of the grave shall in a few short years receive
accessions of myriads more.  The multitudes who crowd the streets of the
Great Metropolis, in their way to the Palace of Industry, and all whom
they represent in distant lands, will ere long descend to the “place of
their fathers’ sepulchres.”  This globe, as it sails round the sun,
carries in its deep hold many a costly thing; but the dust of its buried
generations is a freightage more precious than gold or silver!

Along with this there is the gathering of souls into invisible realms.
It is consonant with reason and revelation, that we should believe in the
conscious existence of minds after their separation from the body.  While
the mortal remains are preserved by Divine Providence for a mysterious
restoration to life at the last day, the immaterial and immortal spirit
enters into a separate condition of blessedness or woe, according to its
character in the present state of being.  “Lazarus died, and was carried
by the angels to Abraham’s bosom.”  “Absent from the body, present with
the Lord.”  The emancipated souls of all the holy dead, through the
mediation of the blessed Redeemer, are gathered together in his immediate
presence where there is fulness of joy, and at his right hand where there
are pleasures for evermore.  “To that state all the pious on earth are
tending; and if there is a law from whose operation none are exempt,
which irresistibly conveys their bodies to darkness and dust, there is
another not less certain and powerful which conducts their spirits to the
abodes of bliss, to the bosom of their Father and their God.  The wheels
of nature are not made to roll backward, everything presses on to
eternity: from the birth of time an impetuous current has set in, which
bears all the sons of men towards that interminable ocean.  Meanwhile
heaven is attracting to itself whatever is congenial to its nature: is
enriching itself by the spoils of earth, and collecting within its
capacious bosom whatever is pure, permanent, and divine; leaving nothing
for the last fire to consume but the objects and the slaves of
concupiscence: while everything which grace has prepared and beautified
shall be gathered and selected from the ruins of the world, to adorn that
Eternal City which hath no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine
in it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.” {110}  And terrific is it to
think that as the multitude of the spirits of the just made perfect is
thus ever augmenting, so also is there an increase of the crowds of
fallen and lost beings in the abodes of despair.  How many, it is to be
feared, are hastening on, by their course in this world, not to paradise,
but to prison—not to be with Christ, but to go with Judas to their own
place!

And beyond these scenes of awful interest there lies another of like
character, to be witnessed at the end of time by everyone who may look at
these pages, because it will be the gathering of the whole human race.
“The dead which are in their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of
man, and shall come forth.”  The sea shall give up the dead which is in
it.  Death and Hades shall deliver up the dead which are in them.  The
dead, small and great, shall stand before God.  The Son of man shall come
in his glory, with all the holy angels with him.  Then shall he sit on
the throne of his glory.  And before Him shall be gathered all nations.
“Behold, he cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see him.”  To think
of all the multitudes who have ever lived upon the earth—all who are now
in heaven or hell—all who are existing like ourselves—all who are yet to
be born, assembled before the judgment-seat of Christ!  No such an
aggregate of human beings can have ever met before.  Compared with that
final one, even regarded simply in reference to numbers, every other
assemblage fades into insignificance.  The solemn incidents of that day,
relating merely to the material globe and the works of men, as predicted
in the New Testament; the melting of the elements and the burning of the
earth really appear, upon reflection, less startling and impressive than
the vast concourse of mortals which shall then be seen.  And, to add to
the wonder, all, with the exception of those who will be alive at the
coming of the Son of man, shall have passed through mysterious stages of
existence, through the hour of dissolution and the disembodied state, and
shall bring with them to the great tribunal some knowledge of the secrets
of eternity.  Something anticipative of their future and everlasting
state they shall have experienced; so that, not in suspense, but with
certain hope or fixed despair, shall they meet their God.  They will have
learned long before, that their moral history in this world had
determined their eternal history in the next: that if not twice born here
below—born of the Spirit as well as of nature—they must then die “the
second death.”  Thoughts and emotions, remembrances and expectations,
such as in none of the world’s great gatherings have been or ever shall
be known, will then be felt.  And, to complete this, the most affecting
of all the associations which our subject has suggested, the mind passes
on to contemplate the purpose and issue of the whole.  Placed before the
great white throne, every man’s work shall be made manifest, the secrets
of all hearts shall be revealed, that the rectitude of the judge may be
seen in his final sentence of life or death.  No human adjudication can
be comparable to that.  “Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true art thou in all thy ways, thou King of saints.”

The brightest of all visions next unfolds.  A structure of peerless
beauty rises above the ruins of the world, and within its gates there
gather men from all lands, select but innumerable.  “And I saw a new
heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away; and there was no more sea.  And I John saw the holy city,
New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride
adorned for her husband.  And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying,
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, . . .
and be their God.  And he showed me that great city, the holy
Jerusalem: and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a
jasper stone, clear as crystal; and had a wall great and high, and had
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels . . .  And the twelve gates
were twelve pearls; every several gate was of one pearl: and the street
of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.  And the city
had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the
glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.  And the
nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it: and the
kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it.  And the
gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no night
there.  And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it.
And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither
whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie: but they which are
written in the Lamb’s book of life.”

Here let the reader lay down the book, and in devout silence muse on
these “four last things.”




PART V.
BENEFICIAL RESULTS, PROBABLE AND POSSIBLE.


    “Albion! on every human soul
       By thee be knowledge shed
    Far as the ocean waters roll,
       Wide as the shores are spread:—
    Truth makes thy children free at home,
       Oh, that thy flag unfurl’d
    Might shine, where’er thy children roam,
       Truth’s banner round the world.”

                                                               MONTGOMERY.

POSSESSED as we are of an aptitude and an inclination to speculate on the
issues of any enterprise in which we take a lively interest, we naturally
turn, when revolving in our thoughts the subject of our Glass Palace and
our great gathering, to look at the consequences which seem likely to
emanate from such a remarkable exhibition, or which may be elicited by
wisdom and benevolence from the fact of such an assemblage of the human
family.  There are temporal results of an advantageous kind certain, or
almost certain, to arise.  While we deprecate the all-absorbing interest
felt by too many in pursuits terminating upon our condition in the
present life; while we condemn an extravagant and idolatrous admiration
of talent in invention and cleverness in contrivance; while we deplore
that in the present day there is, in some quarters, an unmingled
enthusiasm about such matters, which almost looks like the worship “of
the vice, the saw, and the hammer;” while we look with pain upon the
instances around us, in which our fellow-creatures are under the supreme
and disastrous guidance of what an inspired teacher calls the “lust of
the eye and the pride of life;” while we bear in mind that the insatiable
love of gain, which is obvious enough in this commercial age, and is
plainly the besetting sin of multitudes, must lead its subjects into
temptation and a snare, and many hurtful lusts, which drown men in
perdition:—yet, consistently with all this, in strict accordance with the
spirit of our holy religion, which has “the promise of the life that now
is and of that which is to come;” we look with interest and thankfulness
upon all that may improve, elevate, and adorn the condition of mankind in
the present stage of existence.  It seems impossible that this exposition
of the works of all countries should not have a most favourable influence
upon the taste, knowledge, convenience, and physical welfare of mankind.
Whilst the sight of so many productions of art will exercise the
judgment, inspire the admiration, and chasten and guide the sensibilities
of the mind in reference to artistic beauty, we shall obtain an enlarged
acquaintance with modern inventions, and thus derive information relative
to what forms an interesting chapter in the history of human
achievements.  Among the suggestions of philosophical and philanthropic
minds, that of Douglas, for the establishment of a Great Society, which
should survey the compass and collect and arrange the treasures of human
knowledge, a suggestion founded on Lord Bacon’s germinant idea of a
_philosophia prima_, is one of the most remarkable.  The Great Exhibition
will accomplish to a considerable extent one of the ends contemplated in
the project.  It will convey more intelligence, in reference to art, than
any written description could do.  The operations of our “Regent Society”
will furnish a gigantic catalogue of the inventions of men, illustrated
by the inventions themselves.  “Few works,” says the writer we have
named, “would be more conducive to further advancement than ‘a
calendar;’”—here he uses Bacon’s words;—“than a calendar resembling an
inventory of the estate of man, of all inventions which are now extant,
out of which doth naturally result a note what things are yet impossible,
or not invented.”  Here we shall have the very thing—the huge household
book of the world’s furniture, bound in covers of crystal.  By its
influence on the knowledge and cultivation of art the Exhibition will
promote at once our individual enjoyment, the comforts of our home, and
all the conveniences and elegancies of domestic life, and also tend to
strengthen and elevate our national importance.  What will benefit the
rich may bless the poor.  “The discoveries which are the property of the
higher class in one age descend indeed to the lower, but slowly and
imperfectly; and there is ample opportunity and scope for accelerating
the general diffusion of knowledge and inventions among all classes of
society.  Even, in the most civilized countries, the mass of the nation
have been suffered to remain comparatively barbarous; and it will be the
dawn of a new and happier era, when the condition of the multitude is
considered with that interest which is due to those, the sum of whose
joys and sorrows are to all that is felt by the rest of the community
what the ocean is to the drops of rain that fall into it.”

“It would be difficult to point out any branch of art which does not tend
to the prosperity of our country; those which in appearance are most
remote in their influence, however indirectly, yet effectually contribute
to the perfection of its manufactures.  The pursuits of immediate utility
and of refined pleasure, however far separated from each other, alike
combine in exalting our national welfare.  It is not necessary, in
recommending the fine arts to public patronage, to point out how far they
improve and recommend to other nations the productions of manufactures,
since they have higher and more direct claims upon the national
encouragement.  Still their advancement, and above all their diffusion,
become of high importance in a country like Britain, to be and ever to
continue the centre and heart of trade and manufactures.” {122}

We may also advert for a moment to the connexion of the present
enterprise with the pursuits of science.  In the history of human
progress it may indeed be remarked that art has preceded science; that
Phidias came before Aristotle, and Michael Angelo before Lord Bacon; but
still science has ever proved the friend of art in those branches which
minister immediately to the enjoyments of mankind.

Scarcely any specimens of modern ingenuity could be found in the
Exhibition which are not indebted for something of their beauty and
adaptation, if not their very existence, to scientific knowledge.  The
practical application of philosophy has given birth to the manifold kinds
of machinery which at once abridge the toils and improve the products of
human skill.  Now art, if it cannot pay back the debt it owes to science,
may be subservient to the interests of its patron.  So it has proved in
many instances already, and will continue to do, no doubt, as the
necessities of artistic invention give an impulse to philosophical
inquiry.  The manufacture of watches long since led to careful
observations upon the effect of temperature on metals.  Glass-making, at
an early period, occasioned examinations into the colouring properties of
metallic oxides; and the dying of woollens and silks has naturally
induced persons employed in that department to investigate the qualities
of mineral substances as they bore upon the operations of their own
trade.  No sagacity can anticipate, no fancy conceive, the yet future
enlargement of the sum of human science, especially in its minute
details, to be derived from the busy activities of useful art.  All this
the present collection of the industry of the nations will be likely to
promote; and, even with this limited view, one may regard it, in its
relation to the Illustrious Personage who may be deemed the founder of
the Great Institute, as worthy of a place among the “_Opera Basilica_”
which Bacon desired to witness.  Some princes have sought to immortalize
themselves by war; some by purchasing the praise of contemporary poets;
some by erecting palaces, temples, and statues: but at length a prince
has arisen, who, to his lasting honour, seeks, by encouraging a noble
enterprise, to foster the arts and manufactures, not only of his adopted
country but of the wide world.

But the social effects of the great gathering are most important.  Vast
multitudes of the human race cannot be brought together for one common
peaceful purpose without its tending to some desirable end.  There is a
bond of consanguinity which encompasses all the descendants of Adam.
“God has made of one blood the families of men.”  There are sympathies in
all human hearts like the strings of a concert of harps attuned in
harmony: “as in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to
man.”

When men are marshalled under opposite banners in the battle-field, and
taught to look on each other as _natural_ enemies, deadly passions are
evoked from the depths of the heart:

    “Like warring winds, like flames from various points
    That mate each other’s fury, there is nought
    Of elemental strife, were fiends to guide it,
    Can mate the wrath of man.”

But when they meet amidst scenes of peace, to contemplate the glories of
nature, or the beauties of art; where they are freed, for a while at
least, from the sophistry which would persuade them that the depression
of one class or country is necessary to the prosperity of another; the
kindly instincts of the human breast are likely to unfold and operate,
and mutual amity and good-will to brighten and bless the interview.  We
know how the selfishness, pride, and irritability of men, after having
for a season been lulled to rest, may easily be aroused again: we are not
unmindful of the possibility that, even through the Exhibition itself,
jealousies may be excited in some minds; yet still we cannot but hope,
and we fervently pray, that after this peaceful congress of states, and
the amicable interchange of kind thoughts and good offices which
generally, we trust, it will produce, there will be far more even than at
present an indisposition for war among the nations of the earth.  May we
not expect that, after this, America, the continental powers, and
ourselves will feel an increased reluctance to unsheath the sword?  Will
not fighting look more than ever like fratricide?  It was a custom among
the Romans to split in two, and divide between themselves and foreign
visitors who shared their hospitality, a small token called the _tessera
hospitalis_, which was preserved from generation to generation in the two
families who formed the friendly alliance.  It became an heir-loom, to be
enjoyed and used by remote descendants.  Fervently do we desire that the
result of the great gathering in the industrial mansion, the minor
gatherings in other, and especially sacred, places of resort, and the
private gatherings of foreign friends around English-hearths, will be
like the division of the _tessera hospitalis_ in old times, and that its
memory will be cherished and honoured through years to come.

It cannot be supposed that men should meet together from such different
quarters without enlarging their knowledge of each other, of human
nature, and the world.  Narrow and contracted modes of thought on certain
subjects incident to very circumscribed travelling will, we may expect,
expand into generous dimensions, in consequence of a visit from afar to
the British Metropolis; while the opportunities afforded us for
intercourse with foreigners cannot but bring the knowledge of their
methods of life and social habits to our very doors.  By those who are
skilled in the languages of other countries the means of improvement
afforded this year are great beyond expression.

May we not add, that the intelligent observation of our country, its
large freedom, its general order, its civil institutions, its commercial
activity, and, above all, its numerous benevolent associations, will be
adapted to suggest valuable hints and reflections to strangers; by
creating comparison between what they witness here and what they have
been familiar with in their own land, and by leading them to inquire into
the causes of difference between themselves and us?

These are probable beneficial results of the Exhibition; there are still
more important advantages to be contemplated among the things that are
possible, the actual realization of which must depend upon combined and
individual effort.  Whether, in a moral and religious point of view, it
will terminate in blessing the world and ourselves must be determined by
the use we resolve to make of it.  England has created an unprecedented
opportunity for doing spiritual good on a large scale to the other
countries of the earth.  A field of usefulness at home is now opened,
which may, by careful tillage, yield a harvest to be reaped by multitudes
who shall return rejoicing, “taking their sheaves with them.”  No one can
tell where the undulations of the influence will terminate which the
Christians in Britain may now put in action.  Evils relating to the
interests of morality and religion will no doubt be incidentally
occasioned by this vast concourse.  Monsters in human form, who seek “the
wages of iniquity,” by pandering to the gratification of sensuality and
intemperance, will make the months of our world-festivities the season
for plying all the bewitching arts of their deadly craft.  They will
spread their toils with the utmost cunning, dress up profligacy and vice
in the most gorgeous apparel, and deck their “chambers of death” with
surpassing luxuries.  The strange woman will “sit at the door of her
house, in a seat in the high places of the city, to call passengers who
go right on their ways,” and to “lead her guests to the depths of hell.”
The harpies who live by the intemperance of others will not be slow in
making provision for temptation, where the dissipated may “stretch
themselves upon their couches,” and “chant to the sound of the viol, and
drink wine in bowls and anoint themselves with the chief ointments.”  The
gambling-house keeper will be also on the alert, to stimulate and keep
alive a feverish avarice, or to excite some desperate attempt to repair
an already ruined fortune.  In all these ways, and many more, evil
agencies will be busy, even beyond their common wont, to seduce the
innocent, to kindle passions impure and vile in the breasts of the
unsuspecting, and to rouse afresh the palled appetite and the jaded
desires of the man hackneyed in the ways of sinful pleasure.  Incentives
to the breach of the sabbath will also be contrived; facilities for
amusements and excursions on the day of rest will be multiplied;
pleasure-gardens will be opened with new attractions; and steam-boats
will ply, and omnibuses travel, in augmented numbers.  The Sunday press
will, we fear, start on a fresh race for the favour of the worst portion
of the public, by supplying more stimulants than ever to a vitiated and
diseased taste; and other publications of vicious tendency will be
industriously vended.  Against all these dangers we warn the reader.  If
the young and unexperienced, when they visit the metropolis under common
circumstances, need to be on their guard against the designs of the
profligate and unprincipled, with more than double force does that
necessity press upon them at the present season.  A much more than usual
share of caution, wisdom, self-control, and virtuous presence of mind
will be requisite, in order to preserve the visitor from falling a prey
to such as “lie in wait to deceive.”  And let every youth, whose piety
has been formed amidst quiet sequestered scenes, and has till now been
sheltered by parental care, and quickened and trained by domestic example
and instruction, seek, as he comes within the reach of new and unknown
temptations, the special protection of Divine Providence, and the holy
safeguard of the Spirit of God.  Carefully should he strive to fortify
himself against peril, by fixed and frequent meditation on the precepts
and principles of the gospel; and, above all, it becomes him earnestly
and often to present to God that memorable prayer, “Hold up my goings in
thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.”

But though mischiefs may be anticipated, yet it appears to us a vast
preponderance of moral and religious benefit may be accomplished, if
British Christians rise up to the spirit of the great occasion, and seek,
under the blessing of God, to turn it to that valuable account which
Divine Providence seems now to suggest to thoughtful minds.  We repeat,
that England has created for herself an unprecedented opportunity for
doing spiritual good: and we may add that her guilt will be indeed heavy
if she neglect to improve it.

1.  The great gathering supplies singular facilities for making religious
impressions on the minds of our foreign visitors.  As a preliminary to
this, indeed an indispensable prerequisite, we must be careful to show
them courtesy and kindness.  It was held to be a religious duty among the
Greeks to give friendly entertainment to a stranger, because it was
believed he might possibly be a god in disguise.  An inspired pen
enforces the duties of hospitality, on the ground that “some have
entertained angels unawares.”  We look for no such guests; but we are
assured that, whatever be their costume, clime, and speech, they who
visit us are indeed souls of Divine origin and enduring existence; and
the dignity of their nature is a sufficient reason why we should “honour
all men.”  A sedulous and constant endeavour to treat them, wherever they
meet us, with marked respect, and with affectionate civility—to answer
their questions, to guide their way, and to assist their examinations
into objects of interest:—not to do this in a careless manner, but so as
to exhibit that true politeness which is described as “benevolence in
little things,” will tend to secure for us a vantage ground in all the
direct attempts we may make for their spiritual welfare.  It will bespeak
their friendly regards; it will be on the surface of our character a
beautiful proof of the practical nature of our religion, and will
recommend to candid inquiry the principles from which it springs.  A
proud, an indifferent, a suspicious, an antagonistic, or even a
patronizing air of intercourse—(one or other of which habits, or all in
turn, some Englishmen are prone to display when travelling abroad)—will
at once alienate from us the people of other lands, and prevent the
success of our well-meant efforts, however vigorously employed, for their
spiritual good.  We must look on them not as inferiors, not as
individuals worse taught than we—nor as ignorant or foolish—but as men of
like passions and powers, having heads as clear and hearts as warm as our
own.  This propitiation of their favour is in a high degree important;
and if, in the impetuosity of religious zeal, it be disregarded, the high
purpose planned will be removed beyond the probability of accomplishment.

To secure great spiritual results, both combined and individual action
are requisite.  The Bible Society has devised its methods for supplying
foreigners with the word of life in all languages.  Means will be
furnished for sending home many a sojourner amongst us, like him of
Ethiopia, who returned from Jerusalem “sitting in his chariot, and
reading the prophet Esaias.”  And, if he should receive a favourable
impression of our civilization, as we hope he will, and be led to see
that its chief excellences are based upon the influence which the holy
book has wrought in English society—as we trust he may—then will he be
thereby prepared, in some degree, to search out the blessed contents of
that volume which unfolds the promise of the “life that now is, and of
that which is to come.”  The Tract Society has also religious
publications in various tongues for cheap sale or gratuitous
distribution.  And perhaps when prejudice, or an indisposition to afford
sufficient time, may interfere with the reading of the Scriptures, a
tract may obtain a perusal, and drop into the mind some germinant
thoughts which may grow and ripen into the strength and beauty of
spiritual life.  A special organization, moreover, has been contrived to
secure places of worship for “devout men out of every nation under
heaven,” and to provide preachers in foreign languages, to conduct
earnest evangelical ministrations.  And is it too much to suppose that
when they hear, “every man in his own tongue wherein he was born,” the
“wonderful works of God,” there will be some, who, like those assembled
on the day of Pentecost, will be pricked to the heart, and will receive
the word.  And let it not be forgotten that “the natural man receiveth
not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned;” and
moreover that this spiritual discernment is one of the “gifts for men,”
which an ascended Saviour gives in consequence of his having “led
captivity captive.”  The written letter is not “the power of God unto
salvation,” save as the Spirit takes “of the things of Christ,” and shows
them unto us.  Seeds of truth will not produce “them thirty, sixty, or a
hundredfold,” till the Lord give the increase.  There can be no pentecost
without an effusion of the Holy Ghost.  But, while we feel the necessity,
we should by faith and prayer honour him who has promised the supply.
God is willing to do his part, if we do ours.  “Prove me now herewith,
saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven,
and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to
receive it.”

But associated efforts will not suffice.  Isolated action was everything
once.  Combined action is too exclusive now.  The one must be done, and
the other not left undone.  Each man must strive in his own sphere to do
good to the stranger from a far land.  He may distribute tracts, he may
guide to the house of prayer, he may know how to drop a fitly spoken
word; or he may be able to introduce the foreigner to a courteous,
intelligent, and educated friend.  Persons of wealth and influence, and
especially such as, together with these, have tolerable facility in the
use of modern languages, possess talents for usefulness at the present
time, the value of which they can hardly overrate.  By judicious
hospitality; by making a point of cultivating acquaintance with the
guests of the nation, and selecting certain among them as guests of the
family; by frequent and wise arrangements for this purpose; by
entertainments, elegant but simple, generous but not extravagant; and, by
methods easily understood and adopted by those who possess the requisite
means, many may be brought within the reach of the gentle, tender, and
softening influences of Christ’s blessed religion of friendship and
love—may have images painted in their memory never to fade, and emotions
kindled in their hearts never to be quenched, and

                “Oft, while they live—
    In their own chimney nook, as night steals on,
    With half-shut eyes reclining,—oft methinks
    While the wind blusters and the pelting rain
    Clatters without, shall they recall to mind
    The scenes, occurrences they meet with here,
    And wander in Elysium.”

They may discover that they were entertained by angels unawares.
Elements of piety, like rich odours, may steal over their soul, to leave
behind an undying fragrance.  Our Christianity, through our kindness, may
become endeared.  In the reminiscences of future years they may strangely
feel that never were they so near heaven, as during the memorable moments
they spent around the domestic hearths, and at the domestic altars of
England; and, stimulated by the recollection, they may embrace the truths
and find the inward hidden life which will enable them to perpetuate and
multiply such hallowed scenes.

2.  The great gathering affords an argument for making efforts to promote
religion at home, and presents an opportunity for the purpose—“We are a
spectacle to the world!”  The supreme Governor of the nations, the Prince
of the kings of the earth, has assigned us a rank amongst the empires of
the globe which cannot fail to attract the attention of mankind.  Our
constitution and laws, our literature and science, our commerce and art,
our army and navy, present points of interest, forms of grandeur,
specimens of activity, and developments of power, which the other
cultivated portions of our race intelligently study as great theorems in
the science of civilization; while our brethren in distant regions, still
half barbarous, gaze on the signs of our glory, or listen to the tale of
what we are and do, with a vacant and bewildering kind of wonder.  And
moreover the people, institutions, and language of this little isle have
attained a sort of ubiquity.  They are seen, felt, heard, in almost every
latitude of both hemispheres.  Something or other British, some
foot-marks of our wide-spread influence, may be discovered on nearly
every shore.  “We are a spectacle to the world!”  The Christians of our
country—embracing the true disciples and servants of man’s Divine
Redeemer, commissioned by his express mandate, and constrained by his
infinite love—have united and are still employed in the sacred task of
teaching to the ends of the earth the blessed name of him they worship
and adore.  They send the missionary, the Bible, and the tract, to the
pagan people of the world’s two continents, and to them that “are afar
off upon the sea.”  “We are a spectacle to the world!”—rendered so by
Providence, accepting and maintaining the position by our secular and
still more by our sacred enterprises, we more emphatically than ever
assert the publicity of the post we occupy, by now inviting the
inhabitants of the world at large to visit our land.  As a professedly
Christian nation, then, glorying as we do in that title—making a boast
very often of the purity of our religion, of the reformation of old
corruptions, and the brilliant beauty of its spiritual truths, “what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness?”
England should be the model nation for the world.  Will not some
strangers come, almost expecting to find us such?  Will they not look for
striking indications of the influence among ourselves of that
Christianity which we preach to them as worthy of all acceptation?  Will
they not inquire, what is it doing for us?  And we do not fear but the
intelligent and candid among them will recognise not a few of the
beautiful footprints of our religion in our institutions and our homes.
But will they not see something else?  Will they not mark, here and
there, broad spaces in our civilization where the power of our
Christianity has never come—spaces in society left uncivilized?  We need
not now point them out; they have been laid bare again and again, and
urged on our notice by home missionaries and city missionaries, by
magazines, newspapers, and parliamentary records.  They have met our eyes
and made us shudder, in revelations from the press, the pulpit, and the
platform.  Terrible secrets have been divulged respecting some
departments of English life.  Facts have been stated indicative of the
vice and irreligion of some portions of the community.  Meditating on
these things, we seem to hear, from the lips of the foreigner whose
spiritual welfare we contemplate, those well-known words—“Physician, heal
thyself; whatsoever ye have done in Capernaum do also in _thy_ country.”
And the just retort makes us blush—not indeed for our Christianity, but
for ourselves.  Our Christianity, wherever it has been purely taught and
faithfully applied, has wrought marvels on a scale fully proportioned to
the extent of our efforts.  What makes us ashamed is, that we have not
discharged our duty in reference to its diffusion among ourselves, any
more than we have done our duty in reference to its diffusion throughout
the world.

The presence of so many foreigners, whom we virtually challenge to come
and inspect the working of our Christianity, does not really _increase_
our obligation, does not bind us more than we were previously bound, to
promote the religious interests of our own countrymen; but surely it
should powerfully _remind_ us of our obligation, should press it on our
conscientious regard, should awaken us from our slumbers, should
stimulate us now vigorously to do what ought to have been done long
before.  While we see so much in our great towns and rural districts to
pain and humble us in the sight of men, much more ought we to be pained
and humbled in the sight of God.  The observation of mortals is trifling
compared with his.  Their reproach a light matter placed beside his
condemnation.  For years has the eye of him who watched over ancient
Israel to see what they were doing with his truth, whether they obeyed or
dishonoured it, whether they taught its doctrines and precepts to the
young and ignorant, or left them uncultivated, a prey to unbelief, to
superstition, or false philosophy—for years has that eye been looking on
English Christians and noting down their culpable neglect.  Happy will it
be for us as individuals now, and for our country in all coming times, if
the great event of the present year should excite a prevalent attention
to the remaining spiritual necessities of the kingdom—if it should give
an impulse to our schools, our churches, and our missions.  That is among
the possible advantages to be reaped; and earnestly is every Christian
reader who may glance at these pages implored to take up, and ponder, and
carry out practically, with diligence, zeal, love, and prayer, the hints
imperfectly suggested, that so the year may be signalized by an
exhibition of Christian devotedness to the work of religiously benefiting
our countrymen, for which we shall have the approbation of our Divine
Lord, the testimony of a good conscience, and the grateful remembrance of
posterity, who will “rise up and call us blessed.”

At the same time the assemblage of many persons from the provinces in
London this summer, affords an opportunity, an unprecedented opportunity,
for attempting, in a humble and devout spirit, something bold,
significant, and generally attractive of attention, with a view to the
spiritual good of the multitude.  Let thousands upon thousands of
appropriate religious publications be cheaply sold or freely given to the
crowds about the park, and the streams of passengers flowing through the
principal thoroughfares.  And let the gospel be preached by well-known,
accredited, intelligent, and earnest-minded men, in the spirit of the
preachers in the day of Pentecost, not in spacious buildings only but in
the open air, wherever it can be done with propriety;—judicious
arrangements being made for the purpose, that holy and apostolic zeal may
not, without prejudice and misrepresentation, be regarded as ignorant and
rash enthusiasm.  The enterprise is commenced.—Exeter Hall has been
engaged for public services on the Lord’s day through several
months—preaching out of doors is also contemplated.  The initiative
taken, let others follow up the work, till London and its environs be
pervaded with the light and power of the gospel.




PART VI.
LESSONS, PERTINENT AND PRACTICAL.


    “With arm in arm the forest rose on high,
    And lessons gave of brotherly regard:
    Mercy stood in the cloud with eye that wept
    Essential love, and from her glorious bow
    Bending to kiss the earth in token of peace,
    With her own lips, her gracious lips which God
    Of sweetest accent made, she whispered still,
    She whispered to revenge, ‘Forgive, Forgive.’”

          “Silence had a tongue; the grave,
    The darkness, and the lonely waste had each
    A tongue, that ever said, ‘Man, think of God,
    Think of thyself, think of Eternity.’”

                                                                   POLLOK.

A CENTURY ago London was thrown into excitement by the shock of an
earthquake.  In the streets, and for six miles round the city, slight
undulations were plainly perceptible.  Houses were shaken, so that parts
of them fell down; and ships in the river Thames were loosened from their
moorings.  Numbers of the terrified inhabitants flocked into Hyde Park,
which, being a vast area unencumbered with buildings, was supposed to
afford a less perilous position for the people than they could find
elsewhere, in the event of their being overtaken by the dreaded
catastrophe.  Whitfield happened to be in London at the time, when the
minds of the citizens were agitated by intense and distracting fears; and
with an eloquence, which was surpassed only by his zeal, endeavoured to
improve the terrific event by making it the occasion of appropriate
religious appeals.  One night he addressed a vast concourse in the Park,
and while the people pressed together to hear him under the open sky—and
the silence of the scene, the bright stars overhead, the dim shadow of
the speaker, like some impalpable visitant come on a warning mission from
the other world, and the occurrence which had brought them together
contributed to the effect of his discourse,—he with his almost superhuman
voice which with mysterious intonations rolled into men’s ears, and moved
their hearts as with an earthquake, described to them the terrors of the
last day, and exhorted them to flee from the wrath to come.  Could a
Whitfield now, in 1851, gather around him in the same spot the concourse
attracted there under such different circumstances, he might with a
little exercise of his ingenious powers of adaptation, with a slight
effort of his talent for extracting spiritual lessons from passing
incidents, address his auditory on duties of infinite moment, taking as a
suggestive text one of the bearings of the festival of art already
noticed in these pages; namely, its hopeful tendency to produce
reconciliation and peace among the nations of the world.  We can fancy
such a preacher at the quiet hour of eventide—the sky, clear azure, with
a few fleecy clouds—the emerald-like tree-tops bathed in the rays of the
setting sun, and scarcely moved by the gentle air—all nature seeming to
repeat the angel’s song, “on earth peace, good-will toward men;” we can
fancy him lifting up his voice to tell the crowd, softened and soothed by
surrounding influences, that professing as they do to meet in national
friendship, and to celebrate a feast of brotherly love, there are some
other obligations to peace and reconciliation which come still nearer to
their homes and hearts.

Failing the preacher—apart from the helpful influence of the scene
imagined—and debarred the aid of that sympathy which thrills through a
crowd when touched by the living voice of a loving fellow-man, we would
attempt for a moment, through the medium of this little book, to enforce
on the individual reader two methods of improving the present event
suggested on slight reflection.

1.  The professed character, and what we fain hope to be the spirit, of
the gathering, suggest a duty which concerns us in our domestic
relations.

Men, some of them not long ago, in arms against each other, we see now on
terms of amity.  Perhaps the Austrian meets in the park the Italian he
has faced in the field—the Turk, the Egyptian at whom he aimed his
scimitar—the veteran Frenchman, the British soldier with whom he grappled
at Waterloo—but enemies or aliens no longer, they pass, if they do not
recognise each other, as friends.  This congress on pacific terms, with a
cordial understanding, is a spectacle on which the eye loves to linger,
and over which the heart of the philanthropist dilates with hope.  Now,
does not this festival, without any far-fetched application, seem to say
to every one of us, as members of a family, that surely at this time
consistency is added to the other grounds of duty which require us to
cultivate towards those related to us by nature an unsuspicious temper, a
frank and open disposition, a desire to conciliate where differences have
arisen, and a determination to cement where cordiality prevails?  Should
not each endeavour to make his home—whether mansion or cottage, hall or
hut—a sanctuary sacred to peace and concord?  Should not each man now
more than ever aspire to the fulfilment of the office and the enjoyment
of the benediction described and pronounced by the Divine Teacher of
love, “Blessed are the peacemakers; for they shall be called the children
of God.”  Unseemly and inconsistent is it, while we are inviting
foreigners to forget past enmities, to consign to oblivion by-gone
strife, for any of us to allow domestic jealousies and heart-burnings to
torment our breasts, which should be full of domestic charities and
sympathies.  While thousands, of different colours, climes, and costumes,
join to bury the hatchet of strife under the Hyde Park elms, let those
who own a common parentage, who in childhood sat on the same knee, and
were nursed in the same bosom, or whose relationship, though not so
intimate, is far from remote, between whom, alas, differences have sprung
up, seek by mutual concession to arrive at a better understanding, and
thus render the present year memorable in their domestic annals.  It
would be a beautiful incident to associate with this bright passage in
the history of the world a few lines relating to reconciliation and love,
where private strifes had embittered hearts intended by nature and
providence to be ever one.

The religion of Jesus Christ, as it is intended to bring together the
nations of the earth in amity, is also meant to bind together the inmates
of a home in friendship.  Wherever its laws are submitted to, and its
spirit imbibed, there peace must reign, and the domestic circle be a
refuge from strife.  The gospel teaches lessons above all others suited
to this end.  It points the master to God, the model of fatherly
government, and bids him remember that he has a Master in heaven.  It
speaks to the husband, and points to Jesus Christ, bidding the husband
love his wife “as Christ loved the church.”  It speaks to the parents,
and charges them to train up their children “in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.”  It speaks to sons and daughters, commanding
them to honour their father and mother, and “obey them in the Lord.”  It
speaks to servants, and tells them to “be obedient to such as are their
masters according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of
heart as unto Christ, not with eye-service as men-pleasers, but as the
servants of Christ doing the will of God from the heart.”  In this great
world of strife what should be so peaceful as a Christian home?  Amidst
the storms which rock life’s ocean, where shall we find a harbour if not
there?  While divisions are rife, where shall we find union, if not among
the branches from a common parentage?  Scenes of domestic purity,
innocence, and love there are to be met with in many of the homes of our
land, over which religion has thrown its shield, where a happy exemption
from the evils which tear society in pieces is enjoyed; where surely some
relic is to be found of what Eden was; where the parent’s care, like a
deep-rooted tree, spreads out its graceful branches, while the children’s
love, like fragrant and flowery creepers, twists and curls tenacious
tendrils around the venerable stem, “recompensing well the strength it
borrows with the grace it lends,” and the dew of God’s blessing, and the
sunshine of God’s smile, fall upon them one and all.  Happy scenes these,
which Jesus visits as he did the feast at Cana, and the home at Bethany,
teaching such families out of his own word, sanctifying them by his
gracious Spirit, guiding them by his perfect example, protecting them by
his mighty power, comforting them by his unfailing sympathy, and
preparing them for a better home of which he gives them glimpses as they
read the Bible and kneel together at the footstool of God’s throne.
Through faith in the gospel, and prayer for the grace of Him who is its
source and life, these scenes might be greatly multiplied: and who but
must desire it, and strive for its promotion, so that while this year we
invite the nations to meet as a family, the family may meet as the
brethren of Christ and the children of God.

2.  The character and spirit of the gathering suggest a farther lesson
connected with our individual interests and our spiritual relations.

Would we fain look on the present year as sacred to reconciliation and
peace? let each one inquire whether he has ensured the enjoyment of those
blessings in their most precious and enduring forms!  It is a fact, to
which the consciousness of most thoughtful men bears witness, that in
connexion with the intellectual harmony of their nature, there is sad
discord in their moral experience.  The heart is divided against
itself—its little world is full of rebellion and strife, torn in pieces
by intestine war, like an empire in the anarchy of an interregnum, even
as that clear-sighted Hebrew, looking at himself in the radiance of a
light which fell from heaven, most plainly saw, and mournfully confessed,
when he cried, to his and our true Lord and Maker, “_unite_ my heart to
fear thy name!”  That inward confusion indicates the rejection of a
Divine law of order, and that fact explains the secret of many a man’s
misery.  The material world out of which he gathers the triumphs of art,
and the intellectual power by which he achieves his victories over the
physical, are in a state of unvarying subjection to law, and hence the
admired results of his formative genius and taste; but he himself, the
innermost and moral self, is out of harmony with law.  Hence the disorder
and trouble which human beings carry with them everywhere, amidst the
harmony and order of external nature; which, with a still small voice,
reproves them for their disobedience.  Some lead mournful, miserable
lives; they strive to be happy, but happiness flies from them.  All kinds
of expedients are adopted to secure inward peace; but these all fail.
The disappointed ones still try.  Again cheated of the prize, they try—it
is in vain.  And do you not know the secret of your sorrow?  You lay it
perhaps on circumstances, or friends, or on the world, or on nature, or
on God.  You invent causes and miss the right one.  Here it is lying
within yourself, in your own heart and will.  Your inward life is not
under the rule of the great God.  His laws run in one direction, and
carry happiness with them.  Your soul rushes in an opposite direction,
and dashes against these laws.  The collision is your misery and ruin.
“You stretch out your hand against God, and strengthen yourself against
the Almighty.  You run upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses
of his bucklers.”  Man’s heart, divided against itself, throwing off the
yoke of law, is at emnity with God.  Divine relations are disturbed.  The
bonds which alone could bind safety and peace to the human soul, by
binding that soul to the omnipotent and loving Father of all, are
ruptured and destroyed; and thus, giving up its Guide and Guardian, the
wandering child is left to battle with storms in the dark ocean of evil
over which it strives to push its bark.  How can there be security to a
creature who breaks away from God?  How can that bosom be at peace in
which there is no love to him?  His law has sanctions, as all effectual
and perfect law must ever have—pain and trouble therefore follow
disobedience here and hereafter.  “The wages of sin is death.”

Such being the facts of the case, the first desire of all should be to
secure reconciliation with God, with law, with conscience.  The gospel,
and it only, reveals the method of this reconciliation.  It teaches us
that there is redemption in Jesus Christ; that God has set him forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins; that whoso believeth in him is
justified; that there is no condemnation to them that are in him; that he
is our peace; that to as many as receive him he gives power to become the
sons of God; that being made sons they receive not the spirit of bondage
again to fear, but the spirit of adoption, whereby they cry, Abba,
Father; that his people are renewed and sanctified through his Spirit,
that dwelleth in them; that the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in
them who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit; and that having
access by faith unto this grace wherein we stand, they rejoice in hope of
the glory of God.

This Divine reconciliation, inward order, and holy peace are our best
qualifications for seeking to promote domestic reconciliation, national
order, and the world’s peace.  They are the proper preparatives for all
usefulness, private and public—for all works of love towards our
fellow-men.  For how inconsistent it is to think of binding up the wounds
of a family, curing the ills of the commonwealth, or bringing a divided
world together—while the very soul, dreaming of these achievements, is a
spectacle of sorrow to unseen beings; inasmuch as it is engaged in an
impotent warfare against its God, and is bleeding under fatal injuries
inflicted on itself in a struggle so unutterably awful and insane.
Fraternity! concord! union!  These beautiful words come with a melancholy
and mocking sound from any lips but those which have prayed for union
with God, concord with law, and fraternity with a holy obedient universe.
How touching also, even to tears, is it to think that any of the minds so
richly gifted by the Creator should devote themselves through life to
artistic and intellectual toils, for the sole purpose of bringing into
fair proportion and symmetry rude heaps of matter, or confused elements
of thought—while their own nature, in itself and its highest relations,
is left “without form, and void,” like the primeval deep, its face
covered over with darkness.

These blessings to which we have referred alone can satisfy.  Other
things, however fair and good—success in the formation of the beautiful,
and even the production of the beneficent, leave a consciousness of want
until the human spirit be reconciled to itself and God.  The soul wonders
why the cup in which it has mixed such sweet ingredients should yet be
dashed with bitterness; but so it must be while the vessel itself retains
the wormwood of its spiritual enmities.  Let the cup be cleansed; let the
moral nature be renewed and purified by a reconciling faith in the One
Mediator; and then shall the man, however disappointed before, find
himself blessed above all mortal blessedness.

These blessings too are of an enduring character.  It were to tell an
oft-told truth, if we described the limited existence of all works of art
and genius; if we reminded the reader of the crumbling touch of time, and
pointed him to the all-enveloping ruins of the last day, when “the
elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth and all the works
that are therein shall be burned up.”  But these common themes are as
indisputable and awful as they are common: nor should any one forget them
as he looks on the palace of _glass_—(how forcibly symbolic is that
word)—and on the manifold structures, possessions, and achievements of
men.  In contrast with such brittle objects, how strong in enduring
strength is that spiritual good to which, in the conclusion of this
volume, we direct, with intense desire and hope, the thoughts of every
reader.  “The world passeth away and the lust thereof: but he that doeth
the will of God abideth for ever.”  The Divine favour, so plainly
promised to such, is an inheritance exempt from the condition of time,
change, and mortality.  It is a treasure brought down to us from another
world, and will be carried back there by him who finds it.  In the silent
musings of eternity the soul, reconciled to God through faith in the
blood of Jesus Christ, will be able to look back with unspeakable
satisfaction on a course through this world, in which the only thing not
doomed to perish with itself was secured and appropriated.  “I could not
stay in that earth,” will be the reflection of so happy a spirit.  “I saw
but a little while what it had within it of the beautiful and the sublime
in God’s works, and in the works which God enabled man to accomplish; I
left them there to perish, and on the last day I saw them perish: but in
my passage I discerned, by the aid of the Divine Spirit, something better
than all that they signified to me.  I seized the Pearl of great price
and have brought that away.” {161}  On the other hand, how inexpressibly
dreadful must be the recollection of the opposite class of human
souls,—of all unreconciled, unregenerate, earthly, sensuous, and even
merely intellectual ones,—who will be for ever tortured with the
accusation of their own mortifying and fatal folly, because they will
have passed through a world of perishable objects with _only one_ thing
imperishable, and in striving to enjoy them forget that, and after a life
of toil, ambition, and hope, came away with _nothing_.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

             Stevens and Co., Printers, Bell Yard, Temple Bar

                                * * * * *

                            _Just published_.

                            THE ROYAL EXCHANGE
                                   AND
                         THE PALACE OF INDUSTRY;
                                 OR, THE
                 POSSIBLE FUTURE OF EUROPE AND THE WORLD.

                 Foolscap 8vo.  2_s._ extra cloth boards.

        FRENCH AND GERMAN EDITIONS OF THIS WORK ARE IN THE PRESS.

                                * * * * *

                        THE INDUSTRIAL EXHIBITION.

Books and Tracts suited for distribution at the present season in the
following languages:

ENGLISH.      FRENCH.       DUTCH.        SPANISH.
SWEDISH.      GERMAN.       ITALIAN.      PORTUGUESE.
DANISH.       RUSSIAN.      MODERN GREEK.

May be obtained at 56, Paternoster Row, and 164, Piccadilly; also of

NISBET AND CO., 21, Berners         P. HANCE, 14, Upper Gloucester
Street, Oxford Street               Place, Chelsea.

SOHO BAZAAR, Soho Square,           MILLER AND FIELD, 6, Bridge Road,
Counters Nos. 536 & 537.            Lambeth.

HANBURY AND CO., 70, Edgware        J. ROBERTS, 2, Arabella Row,
Road.                               Pimlico.

J. GROOM, Soho Bazaar.              W. H. DALTON, 28, Cockspur
                                    Street, Charing Cross.
J. F. SHAW, 27, Southampton Row.
                                    T. VARTY, 31, Strand.
B. SEELEY AND CO., 2, Hanover
Street, Regent Street.              MRS. PRESS, Depository, Church
                                    Street, Hackney.
C. HASELDEN, 21, Wigmore Street.
                                    W. HANDS, Clapham.
S. J. LADD, 10, Jonson’s Pl.,
Harrow Road.                        G. W. MEDES, Camberwell.

H. FASE, 1, Edwardes’ Terrace,      J. H. JACKSON, Islington Green.
Kensington.
                                    W. D. THOMSON, 138, Upper Street,
J. L. PORTER, 43, Sloane St.        Islington.

W. F. RAMSAY, 11, Brompton Row.     T. K. GORBELL, 16, Hereford
                                    Place, Commercial Road East.

                                * * * * *




FOOTNOTES.


{14}  “The internal columns are placed twenty-four feet apart, while the
external ones have no more than eight feet (a third of twenty-four) of
separation; while the distance between each of the transept columns is
three times twenty-four, or seventy-two feet.  This also is the width of
the middle aisle of the building: the side aisles are forty-eight wide,
and the galleries and corridors twenty-four.  Twenty-four feet is also
the distance between each of the transverse gutters under the roof; hence
the intervening bars, which are at once rafters and gutters, are
necessarily twenty-four feet long.”

{54}  See an interesting lecture on the British Empire, by the Rev. Wm.
Arthur.

{91}  Bishop Thirlwall’s History of Greece.

{94}  Lines from Longfellow’s Belfry of Bruges and Nuremberg are here
blended.

{103}  Cyrene was a Greek colony.

{104}  Life of St. Paul, by Conybeare and Howson, p. 32.

{110}  Robert Hall.

{122}  Douglas, Advancement of Society, p. 151.

{161}  See Foster’s Discourses, second series, p. 128.  The passage is an
imitation, indeed partly a quotation, of one of his.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PALACE OF GLASS AND THE
GATHERING OF THE PEOPLE***


******* This file should be named 64495-0.txt or 64495-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/4/9/64495


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

